Environmental scientists study the ways that humans affect the planet we live on. We hope to find better ways of living that can also help the environment. Ecologists study lifeforms and the environments they live in (Figure 1.16). They try to predict the chain reactions that could occur when one part of the ecosystem is disrupted. 	study of earths weather	1.g
Environmental scientists study the ways that humans affect the planet we live on. We hope to find better ways of living that can also help the environment. Ecologists study lifeforms and the environments they live in (Figure 1.16). They try to predict the chain reactions that could occur when one part of the ecosystem is disrupted. 	study of earthquakes	2.f
Environmental scientists study the ways that humans affect the planet we live on. We hope to find better ways of living that can also help the environment. Ecologists study lifeforms and the environments they live in (Figure 1.16). They try to predict the chain reactions that could occur when one part of the ecosystem is disrupted. 	study of earths oceans	3.b
Environmental scientists study the ways that humans affect the planet we live on. We hope to find better ways of living that can also help the environment. Ecologists study lifeforms and the environments they live in (Figure 1.16). They try to predict the chain reactions that could occur when one part of the ecosystem is disrupted. 	study of solid earth	4.c
Environmental scientists study the ways that humans affect the planet we live on. We hope to find better ways of living that can also help the environment. Ecologists study lifeforms and the environments they live in (Figure 1.16). They try to predict the chain reactions that could occur when one part of the ecosystem is disrupted. 	study of human effects on earth	5.d
Environmental scientists study the ways that humans affect the planet we live on. We hope to find better ways of living that can also help the environment. Ecologists study lifeforms and the environments they live in (Figure 1.16). They try to predict the chain reactions that could occur when one part of the ecosystem is disrupted. 	study of all aspects of planet earth	6.e
Environmental scientists study the ways that humans affect the planet we live on. We hope to find better ways of living that can also help the environment. Ecologists study lifeforms and the environments they live in (Figure 1.16). They try to predict the chain reactions that could occur when one part of the ecosystem is disrupted. 	study of the universe	7.a
Geology is the study of the solid Earth. Geologists study how rocks and minerals form. The way mountains rise up is part of geology. The way mountains erode away is another part. Geologists also study fossils and Earths history. There are many other branches of geology. There is so much to know about our home planet that most geologists become specialists in one area. For example, a mineralogist studies minerals, as seen in (Figure 1.11). Some volcanologists brave molten lava to study volcanoes. Seismologists monitor earthquakes worldwide to help protect people and property from harm (Figure 1.11). Paleontologists are interested in fossils and how ancient organisms lived. Scientists who compare the geology of other planets to Earth are planetary geologists. Some geologists study the Moon. Others look for petroleum. Still others specialize in studying soil. Some geologists can tell how old rocks are and determine how different rock layers formed. There is probably an expert in almost anything you can think of related to Earth! Geologists might study rivers and lakes, the underground water found between soil and rock particles, or even water that is frozen in glaciers. Earth scientists also need geographers who explore the features of Earths surface and work with cartographers, who make maps. Studying the layers of rock beneath the surface helps us to understand the history of planet Earth (Figure 1.12). 	earth science is a branch of geology	false
Geology is the study of the solid Earth. Geologists study how rocks and minerals form. The way mountains rise up is part of geology. The way mountains erode away is another part. Geologists also study fossils and Earths history. There are many other branches of geology. There is so much to know about our home planet that most geologists become specialists in one area. For example, a mineralogist studies minerals, as seen in (Figure 1.11). Some volcanologists brave molten lava to study volcanoes. Seismologists monitor earthquakes worldwide to help protect people and property from harm (Figure 1.11). Paleontologists are interested in fossils and how ancient organisms lived. Scientists who compare the geology of other planets to Earth are planetary geologists. Some geologists study the Moon. Others look for petroleum. Still others specialize in studying soil. Some geologists can tell how old rocks are and determine how different rock layers formed. There is probably an expert in almost anything you can think of related to Earth! Geologists might study rivers and lakes, the underground water found between soil and rock particles, or even water that is frozen in glaciers. Earth scientists also need geographers who explore the features of Earths surface and work with cartographers, who make maps. Studying the layers of rock beneath the surface helps us to understand the history of planet Earth (Figure 1.12). 	some geologists specialize in the study of soil	true
Geology is the study of the solid Earth. Geologists study how rocks and minerals form. The way mountains rise up is part of geology. The way mountains erode away is another part. Geologists also study fossils and Earths history. There are many other branches of geology. There is so much to know about our home planet that most geologists become specialists in one area. For example, a mineralogist studies minerals, as seen in (Figure 1.11). Some volcanologists brave molten lava to study volcanoes. Seismologists monitor earthquakes worldwide to help protect people and property from harm (Figure 1.11). Paleontologists are interested in fossils and how ancient organisms lived. Scientists who compare the geology of other planets to Earth are planetary geologists. Some geologists study the Moon. Others look for petroleum. Still others specialize in studying soil. Some geologists can tell how old rocks are and determine how different rock layers formed. There is probably an expert in almost anything you can think of related to Earth! Geologists might study rivers and lakes, the underground water found between soil and rock particles, or even water that is frozen in glaciers. Earth scientists also need geographers who explore the features of Earths surface and work with cartographers, who make maps. Studying the layers of rock beneath the surface helps us to understand the history of planet Earth (Figure 1.12). 	rock layers below earths surface are a record of earths history	true
Oceanography is the study of the oceans. The word oceanology might be more accurate, since ology is the study of. Graph is to write and refers to map making. But mapping the oceans is how oceanography started. More than 70% of Earths surface is covered with water. Almost all of that water is in the oceans. Scientists have visited the deepest parts of the ocean in submarines. Remote vehicles go where humans cant. Yet much of the ocean remains unexplored. Some people call the ocean the last frontier. Humans have had a big impact on the oceans. Populations of fish and other marine species have been overfished. Contaminants are polluting the waters. Global warming is melting the thick ice caps and warming the water. Warmer water expands and, along with water from the melting ice caps, causes sea levels to rise. There are many branches of oceanography. Physical oceanography is the study of water movement, like waves and ocean currents (Figure 1.13). Marine geology looks at rocks and structures in the ocean basins. Chemical oceanography studies the natural elements in ocean water. Marine biology looks at marine life. 	the science of oceanography started with mapping the oceans	true
Oceanography is the study of the oceans. The word oceanology might be more accurate, since ology is the study of. Graph is to write and refers to map making. But mapping the oceans is how oceanography started. More than 70% of Earths surface is covered with water. Almost all of that water is in the oceans. Scientists have visited the deepest parts of the ocean in submarines. Remote vehicles go where humans cant. Yet much of the ocean remains unexplored. Some people call the ocean the last frontier. Humans have had a big impact on the oceans. Populations of fish and other marine species have been overfished. Contaminants are polluting the waters. Global warming is melting the thick ice caps and warming the water. Warmer water expands and, along with water from the melting ice caps, causes sea levels to rise. There are many branches of oceanography. Physical oceanography is the study of water movement, like waves and ocean currents (Figure 1.13). Marine geology looks at rocks and structures in the ocean basins. Chemical oceanography studies the natural elements in ocean water. Marine biology looks at marine life. 	scientists have not yet visited the deepest parts of the ocean	false
Geology is the study of the solid Earth. Geologists study how rocks and minerals form. The way mountains rise up is part of geology. The way mountains erode away is another part. Geologists also study fossils and Earths history. There are many other branches of geology. There is so much to know about our home planet that most geologists become specialists in one area. For example, a mineralogist studies minerals, as seen in (Figure 1.11). Some volcanologists brave molten lava to study volcanoes. Seismologists monitor earthquakes worldwide to help protect people and property from harm (Figure 1.11). Paleontologists are interested in fossils and how ancient organisms lived. Scientists who compare the geology of other planets to Earth are planetary geologists. Some geologists study the Moon. Others look for petroleum. Still others specialize in studying soil. Some geologists can tell how old rocks are and determine how different rock layers formed. There is probably an expert in almost anything you can think of related to Earth! Geologists might study rivers and lakes, the underground water found between soil and rock particles, or even water that is frozen in glaciers. Earth scientists also need geographers who explore the features of Earths surface and work with cartographers, who make maps. Studying the layers of rock beneath the surface helps us to understand the history of planet Earth (Figure 1.12). 	most of earths water is in rivers and lakes	false
Environmental scientists study the ways that humans affect the planet we live on. We hope to find better ways of living that can also help the environment. Ecologists study lifeforms and the environments they live in (Figure 1.16). They try to predict the chain reactions that could occur when one part of the ecosystem is disrupted. 	humans have had relatively little impact on the oceans	false
Oceanography is the study of the oceans. The word oceanology might be more accurate, since ology is the study of. Graph is to write and refers to map making. But mapping the oceans is how oceanography started. More than 70% of Earths surface is covered with water. Almost all of that water is in the oceans. Scientists have visited the deepest parts of the ocean in submarines. Remote vehicles go where humans cant. Yet much of the ocean remains unexplored. Some people call the ocean the last frontier. Humans have had a big impact on the oceans. Populations of fish and other marine species have been overfished. Contaminants are polluting the waters. Global warming is melting the thick ice caps and warming the water. Warmer water expands and, along with water from the melting ice caps, causes sea levels to rise. There are many branches of oceanography. Physical oceanography is the study of water movement, like waves and ocean currents (Figure 1.13). Marine geology looks at rocks and structures in the ocean basins. Chemical oceanography studies the natural elements in ocean water. Marine biology looks at marine life. 	there are several branches of oceanography	true
Meteorologists dont study meteors they study the atmosphere! The word meteor refers to things in the air. Meteorology includes the study of weather patterns, clouds, hurricanes, and tornadoes. Meteorology is very important. Using radars and satellites, meteorologists work to predict, or forecast, the weather (Figure 1.14). The atmosphere is a thin layer of gas that surrounds Earth. Climatologists study the atmosphere. These scientists work to understand the climate as it is now. They also study how climate will change in response to global warming. The atmosphere contains small amounts of carbon dioxide. Climatologists have found that humans are putting a lot of extra carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. This is mostly from burning fossil fuels. The extra carbon dioxide traps heat from the Sun. Trapped heat causes the atmosphere to heat up. We call this global warming (Figure 1.15). 	meteorologists study meteors	false
Meteorologists dont study meteors they study the atmosphere! The word meteor refers to things in the air. Meteorology includes the study of weather patterns, clouds, hurricanes, and tornadoes. Meteorology is very important. Using radars and satellites, meteorologists work to predict, or forecast, the weather (Figure 1.14). The atmosphere is a thin layer of gas that surrounds Earth. Climatologists study the atmosphere. These scientists work to understand the climate as it is now. They also study how climate will change in response to global warming. The atmosphere contains small amounts of carbon dioxide. Climatologists have found that humans are putting a lot of extra carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. This is mostly from burning fossil fuels. The extra carbon dioxide traps heat from the Sun. Trapped heat causes the atmosphere to heat up. We call this global warming (Figure 1.15). 	the burning of fossil fuels contributes to global warming	true
Water that flows over Earths surface includes runoff, streams, and rivers. All these types of flowing water can cause erosion and deposition. 	flowing water can cause erosion by dissolving minerals in rocks	true
Faster-moving water has more energy. Therefore, it can carry larger particles. It can carry more particles. What causes water to move faster? The slope of the land over which the water flows is one factor. The steeper the slope, the faster the water flows. Another factor is the amount of water thats in the stream. Streams with a lot of water flow faster than streams that are nearly dry. 	more slowly flowing water can carry larger sediments	false
The size of particles determines how they are carried by flowing water. This is illustrated in Figure 10.2. Minerals that dissolve in water form salts. The salts are carried in solution. They are mixed thoroughly with the water. Small particles, such as clay and silt, are carried in suspension. They are mixed throughout the water. These particles are not dissolved in the water. Somewhat bigger particles, such as sand, are moved by saltation. The particles move in little jumps near the stream bottom. They are nudged along by water and other particles. The biggest particles, including gravel and pebbles, are moved by traction. In this process, the particles roll or drag along the bottom of the water. 	the size of sediments determines how they are carried by flowing water	true
The size of particles determines how they are carried by flowing water. This is illustrated in Figure 10.2. Minerals that dissolve in water form salts. The salts are carried in solution. They are mixed thoroughly with the water. Small particles, such as clay and silt, are carried in suspension. They are mixed throughout the water. These particles are not dissolved in the water. Somewhat bigger particles, such as sand, are moved by saltation. The particles move in little jumps near the stream bottom. They are nudged along by water and other particles. The biggest particles, including gravel and pebbles, are moved by traction. In this process, the particles roll or drag along the bottom of the water. 	clay and silt are carried in flowing water by suspension	true
Water that flows over Earths surface includes runoff, streams, and rivers. All these types of flowing water can cause erosion and deposition. 	runoff is only a minor cause of soil erosion	false
Water that flows over Earths surface includes runoff, streams, and rivers. All these types of flowing water can cause erosion and deposition. 	rapidly flowing mountain streams cause little deposition	true
Rivers flowing over gentle slopes erode the sides of their channels more than the bottom. Large curves, called meanders, form because of erosion and deposition by the moving water. The curves are called meanders because they slowly wander over the land. You can see how this happens in Figure 10.6. As meanders erode from side to side, they create a floodplain. This is a broad, flat area on both sides of a river. Eventually, a meander may become cut off from the rest of the river. This forms an oxbow lake, like the one in Figure 10.6. 	slowly flowing rivers erode their channels more at the bottom than at the sides	false
A flood occurs when a river overflows it banks. This might happen because of heavy rains. Floodplains As the water spreads out over the land, it slows down and drops its sediment. If a river floods often, the floodplain develops a thick layer of rich soil because of all the deposits. Thats why floodplains are usually good places for growing plants. For example, the Nile River in Egypt provides both water and thick sediments for raising crops in the middle of a sandy desert. Natural Levees A flooding river often forms natural levees along its banks. A levee is a raised strip of sediments deposited close to the waters edge. You can see how levees form in Figure 10.8. Levees occur because floodwaters deposit their biggest sediments first when they overflow the rivers banks. 	floodplains are poor places for growing crops	false
When a stream or river slows down, it starts dropping its sediments. Larger sediments are dropped in steep areas, but smaller sediments can still be carried. Smaller sediments are dropped as the slope becomes less steep. Alluvial Fans In arid regions, a mountain stream may flow onto flatter land. The stream comes to a stop rapidly. The deposits form an alluvial fan, like the one in Figure 10.7. Deltas Deposition also occurs when a stream or river empties into a large body of still water. In this case, a delta forms. A delta is shaped like a triangle. It spreads out into the body of water. An example is shown in Figure 10.7. 	a levee forms from the largest sediments a river carries	true
As erosion by groundwater continues, the ceiling of a cave may collapse. The rock and soil above it sink into the ground. This forms a sinkhole on the surface. You can see an example of a sinkhole in Figure 10.10. Some sinkholes are big enough to swallow vehicles and buildings. 	sinkholes are caused by groundwater erosion	true
Rivers flowing over gentle slopes erode the sides of their channels more than the bottom. Large curves, called meanders, form because of erosion and deposition by the moving water. The curves are called meanders because they slowly wander over the land. You can see how this happens in Figure 10.6. As meanders erode from side to side, they create a floodplain. This is a broad, flat area on both sides of a river. Eventually, a meander may become cut off from the rest of the river. This forms an oxbow lake, like the one in Figure 10.6. 	broad flat area on both sides of a river where it floods its banks	1.d
Some water soaks into the ground. It travels down through tiny holes in soil. It seeps through cracks in rock. The water moves slowly, pulled deeper and deeper by gravity. Underground water can also erode and deposit material. 	underground hole or cavern eroded by groundwater	2.e
Flowing water slows down when it reaches flatter land or flows into a body of still water. What do you think happens then? The water starts dropping the particles it was carrying. As the water slows, it drops the largest particles first. The smallest particles settle out last. 	deposit that forms when a mountain stream flows suddenly onto flatter land	3.a
A flood occurs when a river overflows it banks. This might happen because of heavy rains. Floodplains As the water spreads out over the land, it slows down and drops its sediment. If a river floods often, the floodplain develops a thick layer of rich soil because of all the deposits. Thats why floodplains are usually good places for growing plants. For example, the Nile River in Egypt provides both water and thick sediments for raising crops in the middle of a sandy desert. Natural Levees A flooding river often forms natural levees along its banks. A levee is a raised strip of sediments deposited close to the waters edge. You can see how levees form in Figure 10.8. Levees occur because floodwaters deposit their biggest sediments first when they overflow the rivers banks. 	raised strip of sediments deposited along the bank of a river	4.c
As erosion by groundwater continues, the ceiling of a cave may collapse. The rock and soil above it sink into the ground. This forms a sinkhole on the surface. You can see an example of a sinkhole in Figure 10.10. Some sinkholes are big enough to swallow vehicles and buildings. 	hole on the surface of the ground that forms when a cave collapses	5. f
When a stream or river slows down, it starts dropping its sediments. Larger sediments are dropped in steep areas, but smaller sediments can still be carried. Smaller sediments are dropped as the slope becomes less steep. Alluvial Fans In arid regions, a mountain stream may flow onto flatter land. The stream comes to a stop rapidly. The deposits form an alluvial fan, like the one in Figure 10.7. Deltas Deposition also occurs when a stream or river empties into a large body of still water. In this case, a delta forms. A delta is shaped like a triangle. It spreads out into the body of water. An example is shown in Figure 10.7. 	triangular deposit that forms when a river empties into a body of still water	6. b
Rivers flowing over gentle slopes erode the sides of their channels more than the bottom. Large curves, called meanders, form because of erosion and deposition by the moving water. The curves are called meanders because they slowly wander over the land. You can see how this happens in Figure 10.6. As meanders erode from side to side, they create a floodplain. This is a broad, flat area on both sides of a river. Eventually, a meander may become cut off from the rest of the river. This forms an oxbow lake, like the one in Figure 10.6. 	body of water that forms when a meander is cut off from the rest of the river	7. g
Deposits from longshore drift may form a spit. A spit is a ridge of sand that extends away from the shore. The end of the spit may hook around toward the quieter waters close to shore. You can see a spit in Figure 10.16. Waves may also deposit sediments to form sandbars and barrier islands. You can see examples of these landforms in Figure 10.17. 	landform that results when a sandbar builds up enough to rise above the waters surface	1.b
Barrier islands provide natural protection to shorelines. Storm waves strike the barrier island before they reach the shore. People also build artificial barriers, called breakwaters. Breakwaters also protect the shoreline from incoming waves. You can see an example of a breakwater in Figure 10.18. It runs parallel to the coast like a barrier island. 	artificial barrier parallel to a shore that reduces beach erosion	2.g
Erosion by waves can create unique landforms (Figure 10.12). Wave-cut cliffs form when waves erode a rocky shoreline. They create a vertical wall of exposed rock layers. Sea arches form when waves erode both sides of a cliff. They create a hole in the cliff. Sea stacks form when waves erode the top of a sea arch. This leaves behind pillars of rock. 	landform that results when waves create a hole in a wavecut cliff	3.f
Longshore drift can erode the sediment from a beach. To keep this from happening, people may build a series of groins. A groin is wall of rocks or concrete that juts out into the ocean perpendicular to the shore. It stops waves from moving right along the beach. This stops the sand on the upcurrent side and reduces beach erosion. You can see how groins work in Figure 10.19. 	artificial barrier perpendicular to the shore that reduces erosion by longshore drift	4.c
Erosion by waves can create unique landforms (Figure 10.12). Wave-cut cliffs form when waves erode a rocky shoreline. They create a vertical wall of exposed rock layers. Sea arches form when waves erode both sides of a cliff. They create a hole in the cliff. Sea stacks form when waves erode the top of a sea arch. This leaves behind pillars of rock. 	landform that results when waves erode the top of a sea arch	5.d
Deposits from longshore drift may form a spit. A spit is a ridge of sand that extends away from the shore. The end of the spit may hook around toward the quieter waters close to shore. You can see a spit in Figure 10.16. Waves may also deposit sediments to form sandbars and barrier islands. You can see examples of these landforms in Figure 10.17. 	underwater ridge of sand running parallel to shore that is deposited by waves	6.e
Deposits from longshore drift may form a spit. A spit is a ridge of sand that extends away from the shore. The end of the spit may hook around toward the quieter waters close to shore. You can see a spit in Figure 10.16. Waves may also deposit sediments to form sandbars and barrier islands. You can see examples of these landforms in Figure 10.17. 	ridge of sand extending out from shore that is caused by longshore drift	7.a
Runoff, streams, and rivers carry sediment to the oceans. The sediment in ocean water acts like sandpaper. Over time, they erode the shore. The bigger the waves are and the more sediment they carry, the more erosion they cause. 	bigger waves can carry more sediment	true
Eventually, the sediment in ocean water is deposited. Deposition occurs where waves and other ocean motions slow. The smallest particles, such as silt and clay, are deposited away from shore. This is where water is calmer. Larger particles are deposited on the beach. This is where waves and other motions are strongest. 	the smallest sediments in ocean water are deposited on the shore	false
Most waves strike the shore at an angle. This causes longshore drift. Longshore drift moves sediment along the shore. Sediment is moved up the beach by an incoming wave. The wave approaches at an angle to the shore. Water then moves straight offshore. The sediment moves straight down the beach with it. The sediment is again picked up by a wave that is coming in at an angle. This motion is show in Figure 10.15 and at the link below. 	most waves strike the shore at an angle rather than straight on	true
Deposits from longshore drift may form a spit. A spit is a ridge of sand that extends away from the shore. The end of the spit may hook around toward the quieter waters close to shore. You can see a spit in Figure 10.16. Waves may also deposit sediments to form sandbars and barrier islands. You can see examples of these landforms in Figure 10.17. 	longshore drift carries sediments far inland	false
Deposits from longshore drift may form a spit. A spit is a ridge of sand that extends away from the shore. The end of the spit may hook around toward the quieter waters close to shore. You can see a spit in Figure 10.16. Waves may also deposit sediments to form sandbars and barrier islands. You can see examples of these landforms in Figure 10.17. 	groins are built to prevent the formation of sandbars	false
Runoff, streams, and rivers carry sediment to the oceans. The sediment in ocean water acts like sandpaper. Over time, they erode the shore. The bigger the waves are and the more sediment they carry, the more erosion they cause. 	sediment in ocean water scrapes rocks like sandpaper	true
Most waves strike the shore at an angle. This causes longshore drift. Longshore drift moves sediment along the shore. Sediment is moved up the beach by an incoming wave. The wave approaches at an angle to the shore. Water then moves straight offshore. The sediment moves straight down the beach with it. The sediment is again picked up by a wave that is coming in at an angle. This motion is show in Figure 10.15 and at the link below. 	longshore drift moves sand opposite to the direction of prevailing winds	false
Deposits from longshore drift may form a spit. A spit is a ridge of sand that extends away from the shore. The end of the spit may hook around toward the quieter waters close to shore. You can see a spit in Figure 10.16. Waves may also deposit sediments to form sandbars and barrier islands. You can see examples of these landforms in Figure 10.17. 	the end of a spit may hook around toward the open ocean	false
Barrier islands provide natural protection to shorelines. Storm waves strike the barrier island before they reach the shore. People also build artificial barriers, called breakwaters. Breakwaters also protect the shoreline from incoming waves. You can see an example of a breakwater in Figure 10.18. It runs parallel to the coast like a barrier island. 	a barrier island is generally small and round in shape	false
Longshore drift can erode the sediment from a beach. To keep this from happening, people may build a series of groins. A groin is wall of rocks or concrete that juts out into the ocean perpendicular to the shore. It stops waves from moving right along the beach. This stops the sand on the upcurrent side and reduces beach erosion. You can see how groins work in Figure 10.19. 	sand collects on both sides of a groin	false
Glaciers form when more snow falls than melts each year. Over many years, layer upon layer of snow compacts and turns to ice. There are two different types of glaciers: continental glaciers and valley glaciers. Each type forms some unique features through erosion and deposition. An example of each type is pictured in Figure 10.27. A continental glacier is spread out over a huge area. It may cover most of a continent. Today, continental glaciers cover most of Greenland and Antarctica. In the past, they were much more extensive. A valley glacier is long and narrow. Valley glaciers form in mountains and flow downhill through mountain river valleys. 	glaciers presently cover about 40 percent of earths surface	false
Glaciers form when more snow falls than melts each year. Over many years, layer upon layer of snow compacts and turns to ice. There are two different types of glaciers: continental glaciers and valley glaciers. Each type forms some unique features through erosion and deposition. An example of each type is pictured in Figure 10.27. A continental glacier is spread out over a huge area. It may cover most of a continent. Today, continental glaciers cover most of Greenland and Antarctica. In the past, they were much more extensive. A valley glacier is long and narrow. Valley glaciers form in mountains and flow downhill through mountain river valleys. 	continental glaciers are long and narrow	false
Glaciers form when more snow falls than melts each year. Over many years, layer upon layer of snow compacts and turns to ice. There are two different types of glaciers: continental glaciers and valley glaciers. Each type forms some unique features through erosion and deposition. An example of each type is pictured in Figure 10.27. A continental glacier is spread out over a huge area. It may cover most of a continent. Today, continental glaciers cover most of Greenland and Antarctica. In the past, they were much more extensive. A valley glacier is long and narrow. Valley glaciers form in mountains and flow downhill through mountain river valleys. 	valley glaciers flow downhill through river valleys	true
Glaciers form when more snow falls than melts each year. Over many years, layer upon layer of snow compacts and turns to ice. There are two different types of glaciers: continental glaciers and valley glaciers. Each type forms some unique features through erosion and deposition. An example of each type is pictured in Figure 10.27. A continental glacier is spread out over a huge area. It may cover most of a continent. Today, continental glaciers cover most of Greenland and Antarctica. In the past, they were much more extensive. A valley glacier is long and narrow. Valley glaciers form in mountains and flow downhill through mountain river valleys. 	continental glaciers form cirques and horns	false
Like flowing water, flowing ice erodes the land and deposits the material elsewhere. Glaciers cause erosion in two main ways: plucking and abrasion. Plucking is the process by which rocks and other sediments are picked up by a glacier. They freeze to the bottom of the glacier and are carried away by the flowing ice. Abrasion is the process in which a glacier scrapes underlying rock. The sediments and rocks frozen in the ice at the bottom and sides of a glacier act like sandpaper. They wear away rock. They may also leave scratches and grooves that show the direction the glacier moved. 	a glacier picks up sediments when they freeze to ice at the bottom of the glacier	true
Like flowing water, flowing ice erodes the land and deposits the material elsewhere. Glaciers cause erosion in two main ways: plucking and abrasion. Plucking is the process by which rocks and other sediments are picked up by a glacier. They freeze to the bottom of the glacier and are carried away by the flowing ice. Abrasion is the process in which a glacier scrapes underlying rock. The sediments and rocks frozen in the ice at the bottom and sides of a glacier act like sandpaper. They wear away rock. They may also leave scratches and grooves that show the direction the glacier moved. 	the narrow end of a drumlin points in the direction that the glacier moved	true
Like flowing water, flowing ice erodes the land and deposits the material elsewhere. Glaciers cause erosion in two main ways: plucking and abrasion. Plucking is the process by which rocks and other sediments are picked up by a glacier. They freeze to the bottom of the glacier and are carried away by the flowing ice. Abrasion is the process in which a glacier scrapes underlying rock. The sediments and rocks frozen in the ice at the bottom and sides of a glacier act like sandpaper. They wear away rock. They may also leave scratches and grooves that show the direction the glacier moved. 	all glaciers move because of gravity	true
Like flowing water, flowing ice erodes the land and deposits the material elsewhere. Glaciers cause erosion in two main ways: plucking and abrasion. Plucking is the process by which rocks and other sediments are picked up by a glacier. They freeze to the bottom of the glacier and are carried away by the flowing ice. Abrasion is the process in which a glacier scrapes underlying rock. The sediments and rocks frozen in the ice at the bottom and sides of a glacier act like sandpaper. They wear away rock. They may also leave scratches and grooves that show the direction the glacier moved. 	the main way glaciers cause erosion is by ice wedging	false
Like flowing water, flowing ice erodes the land and deposits the material elsewhere. Glaciers cause erosion in two main ways: plucking and abrasion. Plucking is the process by which rocks and other sediments are picked up by a glacier. They freeze to the bottom of the glacier and are carried away by the flowing ice. Abrasion is the process in which a glacier scrapes underlying rock. The sediments and rocks frozen in the ice at the bottom and sides of a glacier act like sandpaper. They wear away rock. They may also leave scratches and grooves that show the direction the glacier moved. 	glaciers are getting smaller because of global warming	true
Valley glaciers form several unique features through erosion. You can see some of them in Figure 10.28. As a valley glacier flows through a V-shaped river valley, it scrapes away the sides of the valley. It carves a U-shaped valley with nearly vertical walls. A line called the trimline shows the highest level the glacier reached. A cirque is a rounded hollow carved in the side of a mountain by a glacier. The highest cliff of a cirque is called the headwall. An arte is a jagged ridge that remains when cirques form on opposite sides of a mountain. A low spot in an arte is called a col. A horn is a sharp peak that is left behind when glacial cirques are on at least three sides of a mountain. 	the valley carved by a mountain glacier has gently sloping walls	false
Valley glaciers form several unique features through erosion. You can see some of them in Figure 10.28. As a valley glacier flows through a V-shaped river valley, it scrapes away the sides of the valley. It carves a U-shaped valley with nearly vertical walls. A line called the trimline shows the highest level the glacier reached. A cirque is a rounded hollow carved in the side of a mountain by a glacier. The highest cliff of a cirque is called the headwall. An arte is a jagged ridge that remains when cirques form on opposite sides of a mountain. A low spot in an arte is called a col. A horn is a sharp peak that is left behind when glacial cirques are on at least three sides of a mountain. 	rounded hollow carved in the side of a mountain by a glacier	1. d
Glaciers form when more snow falls than melts each year. Over many years, layer upon layer of snow compacts and turns to ice. There are two different types of glaciers: continental glaciers and valley glaciers. Each type forms some unique features through erosion and deposition. An example of each type is pictured in Figure 10.27. A continental glacier is spread out over a huge area. It may cover most of a continent. Today, continental glaciers cover most of Greenland and Antarctica. In the past, they were much more extensive. A valley glacier is long and narrow. Valley glaciers form in mountains and flow downhill through mountain river valleys. 	type of glacier that is spread out over a large area	2.a
Glaciers deposit their sediment when they melt. They drop and leave behind whatever was once frozen in their ice. Its usually a mixture of particles and rocks of all sizes, called glacial till. Water from the melting ice may form lakes or other water features. Figure 10.29 shows some of the landforms glaciers deposit when they melt. Moraine is sediment deposited by a glacier. A ground moraine is a thick layer of sediments left behind by a retreating glacier. An end moraine is a low ridge of sediments deposited at the end of the glacier. It marks the greatest distance the glacier advanced. A drumlin is a long, low hill of sediments deposited by a glacier. Drumlins often occur in groups called drumlin fields. The narrow end of each drumlin points in the direction the glacier was moving when it dropped the sediments. An esker is a winding ridge of sand deposited by a stream of meltwater. Such streams flow underneath a retreating glacier. A kettle lake occurs where a chunk of ice was left behind in the sediments of a retreating glacier. When the ice melted, it left a depression. The meltwater filled it to form a lake. 	long low hill of sediments deposited by a glacier	3.g
Glaciers form when more snow falls than melts each year. Over many years, layer upon layer of snow compacts and turns to ice. There are two different types of glaciers: continental glaciers and valley glaciers. Each type forms some unique features through erosion and deposition. An example of each type is pictured in Figure 10.27. A continental glacier is spread out over a huge area. It may cover most of a continent. Today, continental glaciers cover most of Greenland and Antarctica. In the past, they were much more extensive. A valley glacier is long and narrow. Valley glaciers form in mountains and flow downhill through mountain river valleys. 	type of glacier that forms in mountains	4..e
Glaciers deposit their sediment when they melt. They drop and leave behind whatever was once frozen in their ice. Its usually a mixture of particles and rocks of all sizes, called glacial till. Water from the melting ice may form lakes or other water features. Figure 10.29 shows some of the landforms glaciers deposit when they melt. Moraine is sediment deposited by a glacier. A ground moraine is a thick layer of sediments left behind by a retreating glacier. An end moraine is a low ridge of sediments deposited at the end of the glacier. It marks the greatest distance the glacier advanced. A drumlin is a long, low hill of sediments deposited by a glacier. Drumlins often occur in groups called drumlin fields. The narrow end of each drumlin points in the direction the glacier was moving when it dropped the sediments. An esker is a winding ridge of sand deposited by a stream of meltwater. Such streams flow underneath a retreating glacier. A kettle lake occurs where a chunk of ice was left behind in the sediments of a retreating glacier. When the ice melted, it left a depression. The meltwater filled it to form a lake. 	winding ridge of sand deposited by a stream of meltwater	5.c
Valley glaciers form several unique features through erosion. You can see some of them in Figure 10.28. As a valley glacier flows through a V-shaped river valley, it scrapes away the sides of the valley. It carves a U-shaped valley with nearly vertical walls. A line called the trimline shows the highest level the glacier reached. A cirque is a rounded hollow carved in the side of a mountain by a glacier. The highest cliff of a cirque is called the headwall. An arte is a jagged ridge that remains when cirques form on opposite sides of a mountain. A low spot in an arte is called a col. A horn is a sharp peak that is left behind when glacial cirques are on at least three sides of a mountain. 	jagged ridge that remains when two cirques form on opposite sides of a mountain	6.b
Valley glaciers form several unique features through erosion. You can see some of them in Figure 10.28. As a valley glacier flows through a V-shaped river valley, it scrapes away the sides of the valley. It carves a U-shaped valley with nearly vertical walls. A line called the trimline shows the highest level the glacier reached. A cirque is a rounded hollow carved in the side of a mountain by a glacier. The highest cliff of a cirque is called the headwall. An arte is a jagged ridge that remains when cirques form on opposite sides of a mountain. A low spot in an arte is called a col. A horn is a sharp peak that is left behind when glacial cirques are on at least three sides of a mountain. 	sharp peak that is left behind when glaciers erode all sides of a mountain	7.f
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	preserved traces can include burrows	true
Of all the organisms that ever lived, only a tiny number became fossils. Still, scientists learn a lot from fossils. Fossils are our best clues about the history of life on Earth. 	scientists have discovered fossil footprints	true
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	complete preservation occurs only when remains are preserved in rock	false
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	in the past fossils inspired legends of monsters	true
Its very unlikely that any given organism will become a fossil. The remains of many organisms are consumed. Remains also may be broken down by other living things or by the elements. Hard parts, such as bones, are much more likely to become fossils. But even they rarely last long enough to become fossils. Organisms without hard parts are the least likely to be fossilized. Fossils of soft organisms, from bacteria to jellyfish, are very rare. 	it is very likely that any given organism will become a fossil	false
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	fossils in older rocks are more similar to animals that live today than fossils in younger rocks	false
Fossils give clues about major geological events. Fossils can also give clues about past climates. Fossils of ocean animals are found at the top of Mt. Everest. Mt. Everest is the highest mountain on Earth. These fossils show that the area was once at the bottom of a sea. The seabed was later uplifted to form the Himalaya mountain range. An example is shown in the Figure 11.4. Fossils of plants are found in Antarctica. Currently, Antarctica is almost completely covered with ice. The fossil plants show that Antarctica once had a much warmer climate. 	fossils of ocean animals have been found at the top of mt everest	true
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	fossils form when remains are replaced by minerals	true
Fossils give clues about major geological events. Fossils can also give clues about past climates. Fossils of ocean animals are found at the top of Mt. Everest. Mt. Everest is the highest mountain on Earth. These fossils show that the area was once at the bottom of a sea. The seabed was later uplifted to form the Himalaya mountain range. An example is shown in the Figure 11.4. Fossils of plants are found in Antarctica. Currently, Antarctica is almost completely covered with ice. The fossil plants show that Antarctica once had a much warmer climate. 	fossils show that antarctica once had a much warmer climate	true
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	index fossils are the first fossils ever discovered of an extinct species	false
Of all the organisms that ever lived, only a tiny number became fossils. Still, scientists learn a lot from fossils. Fossils are our best clues about the history of life on Earth. 	complete preservation is valuable because scientists can study the organisms dna	true
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	there are no plants in antarctica so there are no plant fossils there	false
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	teeth are more likely than feathers to be preserved as fossils	true
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	people first started discovering fossils about 150 years ago	false
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	all fossils form when remains of dead organisms are covered with sediments	false
Most fossils form when a dead organism is buried in sediment. Layers of sediment slowly build up. The sediment is buried and turns into sedimentary rock. The remains inside the rock also turn to rock. The remains are replaced by minerals. The remains literally turn to stone. Fossilization is illustrated in Figure 11.2. 	dark stain in rock left by the remains of an organism	1. g
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	preserved tracks or other evidence of an organism that lived in the past	2. e
Fossils are used to determine the ages of rock layers. Index fossils are the most useful for this. Index fossils are of organisms that lived over a wide area. They lived for a fairly short period of time. An index fossil allows a scientist to determine the age of the rock it is in. Trilobite fossils, as shown in Figure 11.5, are common index fossils. Trilobites were widespread marine animals. They lived between 500 and 600 million years ago. Rock layers containing trilobite fossils must be that age. Different species of trilobite fossils can be used to narrow the age even more. 	type of fossil that can be used to determine the age of rock layers	3. c
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils	4.f
Fossils may form in other ways. With complete preservation, the organism doesnt change much. As seen below, tree sap may cover an organism and then turn into amber. The original organism is preserved so that scientists might be able to study its DNA. Organisms can also be completely preserved in tar or ice. Molds and casts are another way organisms can be fossilized. A mold is an imprint of an organism left in rock. The organisms remains break down completely. Rock that fills in the mold resembles the original remains. The fossil that forms in the mold is called a cast. Molds and casts usually form in sedimentary rock. With compression, an organisms remains are put under great pressure inside rock layers. This leaves behind a dark stain in the rock. You can read about them in Figure 11.3. 	type of fossil that forms in a mold	5.d
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	any preserved remains or traces of an organism that lived in the past	6.a
Most fossils form when a dead organism is buried in sediment. Layers of sediment slowly build up. The sediment is buried and turns into sedimentary rock. The remains inside the rock also turn to rock. The remains are replaced by minerals. The remains literally turn to stone. Fossilization is illustrated in Figure 11.2. 	imprint of an organism left in rock	7.b
The geologic time scale may include illustrations of how life on Earth has changed. Major events on Earth may also be shown. These include the formation of the major mountains or the extinction of the dinosaurs. Figure 11.14 is a different kind of the geologic time scale. It shows how Earths environment and life forms have changed. 	earths geologic processes have changed over time	false
The geologic time scale may include illustrations of how life on Earth has changed. Major events on Earth may also be shown. These include the formation of the major mountains or the extinction of the dinosaurs. Figure 11.14 is a different kind of the geologic time scale. It shows how Earths environment and life forms have changed. 	extinction occurs when a species completely dies out	true
Sediments were deposited in ancient seas in horizontal, or flat, layers. If sedimentary rock layers are tilted, they must have moved after they were deposited. 	layers of sedimentary rock are called strata	true
When rock layers are in the same place, its easy to give them relative ages. But what if rock layers are far apart? What if they are on different continents? What evidence is used to match rock layers in different places? 	the relative age of a rock is its approximate age in years	false
Rock layers extend laterally, or out to the sides. They may cover very broad areas, especially if they formed at the bottom of ancient seas. Erosion may have worn away some of the rock, but layers on either side of eroded areas will still match up. Look at the Grand Canyon in Figure 11.8. Its a good example of lateral continuity. You can clearly see the same rock layers on opposite sides of the canyon. The matching rock layers were deposited at the same time, so they are the same age. 	rock layers on opposite sides of the grand canyon show lateral continuity	true
Index fossils are commonly used to match rock layers in different places. You can see how this works in Figure 	key beds are rock layers that have unconformities	false
Index fossils are commonly used to match rock layers in different places. You can see how this works in Figure 	more than one type of index fossil provides stronger evidence that rock layers are the same age	true
Divisions in Earth history are recorded on the geologic time scale. For example, the Cretaceous ended when the dinosaurs went extinct. European geologists were the first to put together the geologic time scale. So, many of the names of the time periods are from places in Europe. The Jurassic Period is named for the Jura Mountains in France and Switzerland, for example. 	the cretaceous period ended when the first dinosaurs appeared	false
The largest blocks of time on the geologic time scale are called eons. Eons are split into eras. Each era is divided into periods. Periods may be further divided into epochs. Geologists may just use early or late. An example is late Jurassic, or early Cretaceous. Figure 11.13 shows you what the geologic time scale looks like. 	the earliest geologic time scale showed how many years ago each era began	false
We now live in the Phanerozoic Eon, the Cenozoic Era, the Quaternary Period, and the Holocene Epoch. Phanero- zoic means visible life. During this eon, rocks contain visible fossils. Before the Phanerozoic, life was microscopic. The Cenozoic Era means new life. It encompasses the most recent forms of life on Earth. The Cenozoic is sometimes called the Age of Mammals. Before the Cenozoic came the Mesozoic and Paleozoic. The Mesozoic means middle life. This is the age of reptiles, when dinosaurs ruled the planet. The Paleozoic is old life. Organisms like invertebrates and fish were the most common lifeforms. 	fish were common organisms during the paleozoic era	true
Index fossils are commonly used to match rock layers in different places. You can see how this works in Figure 	fossil b is younger than fossil a but the rock layer containing fossil b is beneath the rock layer	true
To create the geologic time scale, geologists correlated rock layers. Stenos laws were used to determine the relative ages of rocks. Older rocks are at the bottom and younger rocks are at the top. The early geologic time scale could only show the order of events. The discovery of radioactivity in the late 1800s changed that. Scientists could determine the exact age of some rocks in years. They assigned dates to the time scale divisions. For example, the Jurassic began about 200 million years ago. It lasted for about 55 million years. 	to help decipher the geologic history of a region create a geologic time scale using the rock units you	false
Earth formed 4.5 billion years ago. Geologists divide this time span into smaller periods. Many of the divisions mark major events in life history. 	james hutton thought earth was old because he saw how slowly geological processes work now	true
Rock layers may have another rock cutting across them, like the igneous rock in Figure 11.9. Which rock is older? To determine this, we use the law of cross-cutting relationships. The cut rock layers are older than the rock that cuts across them. 	crosscutting relationships help geologists to determine the older and younger of two rock units	true
When rock layers are in the same place, its easy to give them relative ages. But what if rock layers are far apart? What if they are on different continents? What evidence is used to match rock layers in different places? 	in the process of relative dating scientists determine the exact age of a fossil or rock	false
Superposition refers to the position of rock layers and their relative ages. Relative age means age in comparison with other rocks, either younger or older. The relative ages of rocks are important for understanding Earths history. New rock layers are always deposited on top of existing rock layers. Therefore, deeper layers must be older than layers closer to the surface. This is the law of superposition. You can see an example in Figure 11.7. 	whether a rock is older or younger than other rocks	1.c
Sediments were deposited in ancient seas in horizontal, or flat, layers. If sedimentary rock layers are tilted, they must have moved after they were deposited. 	law stating that rock layers are deposited in horizontal layers	2.e
Superposition refers to the position of rock layers and their relative ages. Relative age means age in comparison with other rocks, either younger or older. The relative ages of rocks are important for understanding Earths history. New rock layers are always deposited on top of existing rock layers. Therefore, deeper layers must be older than layers closer to the surface. This is the law of superposition. You can see an example in Figure 11.7. 	law stating that rock layers closer to the surface are younger than deeper rock layers	3.b
Rock layers may have another rock cutting across them, like the igneous rock in Figure 11.9. Which rock is older? To determine this, we use the law of cross-cutting relationships. The cut rock layers are older than the rock that cuts across them. 	law stating that rock layers are older than any rocks that cut across them	4.f
Index fossils are commonly used to match rock layers in different places. You can see how this works in Figure 	gap in a sequence of rock layers	5.g
Index fossils are commonly used to match rock layers in different places. You can see how this works in Figure 	law stating that matching nearby rock layers are the same age	6.d
Index fossils are commonly used to match rock layers in different places. You can see how this works in Figure 	study of rock layers	7.a
Radioactive decay is the breakdown of unstable elements into stable elements. To understand this process, recall that the atoms of all elements contain the particles protons, neutrons, and electrons. 	the number of protons in atoms of the same element may vary	false
An element is defined by the number of protons it contains. All atoms of a given element contain the same number of protons. The number of neutrons in an element may vary. Atoms of an element with different numbers of neutrons are called isotopes. Consider carbon as an example. Two isotopes of carbon are shown in Figure 11.15. Compare their protons and neutrons. Both contain 6 protons. But carbon-12 has 6 neutrons and carbon-14 has 8 neutrons. Almost all carbon atoms are carbon-12. This is a stable isotope of carbon. Only a tiny percentage of carbon atoms are carbon-14. Carbon-14 is unstable. Figure 11.16 shows carbon dioxide, which forms in the atmosphere from carbon-14 and oxygen. Neutrons in cosmic rays strike nitrogen atoms in the atmosphere. The nitrogen forms carbon- 14. Carbon in the atmosphere combines with oxygen to form carbon dioxide. Plants take in carbon dioxide during photosynthesis. In this way, carbon-14 enters food chains. 	almost all carbon atoms are atoms of carbon14	false
Like other unstable isotopes, carbon-14 breaks down, or decays. For carbon-14 decay, each carbon-14 atom loses an alpha particle. It changes to a stable atom of nitrogen-14. This is illustrated in Figure 11.17. The decay of an unstable isotope to a stable element occurs at a constant rate. This rate is different for each isotope pair. The decay rate is measured in a unit called the half-life. The half-life is the time it takes for half of a given amount of an isotope to decay. For example, the half-life of carbon-14 is 5730 years. Imagine that you start out with 100 grams of carbon-14. In 5730 years, half of it decays. This leaves 50 grams of carbon-14. Over the next 5730 years, half of the remaining amount will decay. Now there are 25 grams of carbon-14. How many grams will there be in another 5730 years? Figure 11.18 graphs the rate of decay of carbon-14. 	when an atom of carbon14 decays it loses an electron	false
The rate of decay of unstable isotopes can be used to estimate the absolute ages of fossils and rocks. This type of dating is called radiometric dating. 	using radioactivity scientists are able to measure the relative age of some rocks	false
Radioactive decay is the breakdown of unstable elements into stable elements. To understand this process, recall that the atoms of all elements contain the particles protons, neutrons, and electrons. 	carbon14 atoms decay to carbon13 atoms	false
Radioactive decay is the breakdown of unstable elements into stable elements. To understand this process, recall that the atoms of all elements contain the particles protons, neutrons, and electrons. 	radioactive isotopes gain or lose particles to become different elements	true
Like other unstable isotopes, carbon-14 breaks down, or decays. For carbon-14 decay, each carbon-14 atom loses an alpha particle. It changes to a stable atom of nitrogen-14. This is illustrated in Figure 11.17. The decay of an unstable isotope to a stable element occurs at a constant rate. This rate is different for each isotope pair. The decay rate is measured in a unit called the half-life. The half-life is the time it takes for half of a given amount of an isotope to decay. For example, the half-life of carbon-14 is 5730 years. Imagine that you start out with 100 grams of carbon-14. In 5730 years, half of it decays. This leaves 50 grams of carbon-14. Over the next 5730 years, half of the remaining amount will decay. Now there are 25 grams of carbon-14. How many grams will there be in another 5730 years? Figure 11.18 graphs the rate of decay of carbon-14. 	the halflife of a radioactive isotope is constant	true
Like other unstable isotopes, carbon-14 breaks down, or decays. For carbon-14 decay, each carbon-14 atom loses an alpha particle. It changes to a stable atom of nitrogen-14. This is illustrated in Figure 11.17. The decay of an unstable isotope to a stable element occurs at a constant rate. This rate is different for each isotope pair. The decay rate is measured in a unit called the half-life. The half-life is the time it takes for half of a given amount of an isotope to decay. For example, the half-life of carbon-14 is 5730 years. Imagine that you start out with 100 grams of carbon-14. In 5730 years, half of it decays. This leaves 50 grams of carbon-14. Over the next 5730 years, half of the remaining amount will decay. Now there are 25 grams of carbon-14. How many grams will there be in another 5730 years? Figure 11.18 graphs the rate of decay of carbon-14. 	a living thing takes in carbon14 only while it is alive	true
The rate of decay of unstable isotopes can be used to estimate the absolute ages of fossils and rocks. This type of dating is called radiometric dating. 	no one knows earths age because no isotopes are good for substances that old	false
The rate of decay of unstable isotopes can be used to estimate the absolute ages of fossils and rocks. This type of dating is called radiometric dating. 	carbon14 dating can be used to determine the ages of rocks	false
Radioactive decay is the breakdown of unstable elements into stable elements. To understand this process, recall that the atoms of all elements contain the particles protons, neutrons, and electrons. 	carbon14 loses an alpha particle which is two protons and two electrons	false
An element is defined by the number of protons it contains. All atoms of a given element contain the same number of protons. The number of neutrons in an element may vary. Atoms of an element with different numbers of neutrons are called isotopes. Consider carbon as an example. Two isotopes of carbon are shown in Figure 11.15. Compare their protons and neutrons. Both contain 6 protons. But carbon-12 has 6 neutrons and carbon-14 has 8 neutrons. Almost all carbon atoms are carbon-12. This is a stable isotope of carbon. Only a tiny percentage of carbon atoms are carbon-14. Carbon-14 is unstable. Figure 11.16 shows carbon dioxide, which forms in the atmosphere from carbon-14 and oxygen. Neutrons in cosmic rays strike nitrogen atoms in the atmosphere. The nitrogen forms carbon- 14. Carbon in the atmosphere combines with oxygen to form carbon dioxide. Plants take in carbon dioxide during photosynthesis. In this way, carbon-14 enters food chains. 	plants take in carbon14 during photosynthesis	true
Like other unstable isotopes, carbon-14 breaks down, or decays. For carbon-14 decay, each carbon-14 atom loses an alpha particle. It changes to a stable atom of nitrogen-14. This is illustrated in Figure 11.17. The decay of an unstable isotope to a stable element occurs at a constant rate. This rate is different for each isotope pair. The decay rate is measured in a unit called the half-life. The half-life is the time it takes for half of a given amount of an isotope to decay. For example, the half-life of carbon-14 is 5730 years. Imagine that you start out with 100 grams of carbon-14. In 5730 years, half of it decays. This leaves 50 grams of carbon-14. Over the next 5730 years, half of the remaining amount will decay. Now there are 25 grams of carbon-14. How many grams will there be in another 5730 years? Figure 11.18 graphs the rate of decay of carbon-14. 	the halflife of carbon14 is 5730 years	true
The rate of decay of unstable isotopes can be used to estimate the absolute ages of fossils and rocks. This type of dating is called radiometric dating. 	all fossils can be dated with carbon14 dating	false
The isotopes in Table 11.1 are used to date igneous rocks. These isotopes have much longer half-lives than carbon- 14. Because they decay more slowly, they can be used to date much older specimens. Which of these isotopes could be used to date a rock that formed half a million years ago? Unstable Isotope Decays to At a Half-Life of (years) Potassium-40 Uranium-235 Uranium-238 Argon-40 Lead-207 Lead-206 1.3 billion 700 million 4.5 billion Dates Rocks Aged (years old) 100 thousand - 1 billion 1 million - 4.5 billion 1 million - 4.5 billion 	to date a rock that is as old as earth you could use potassium40 dating	false
The rate of decay of unstable isotopes can be used to estimate the absolute ages of fossils and rocks. This type of dating is called radiometric dating. 	using radioactive decay to estimate the age of a fossil or rock	1.g
Radioactive decay is the breakdown of unstable elements into stable elements. To understand this process, recall that the atoms of all elements contain the particles protons, neutrons, and electrons. 	radioactive element with a relatively long halflife	2.d
The rate of decay of unstable isotopes can be used to estimate the absolute ages of fossils and rocks. This type of dating is called radiometric dating. 	rate of decay of a radioactive element	3.f
Radioactive decay is the breakdown of unstable elements into stable elements. To understand this process, recall that the atoms of all elements contain the particles protons, neutrons, and electrons. 	atom of an element with a different number of neutrons	4.a
An element is defined by the number of protons it contains. All atoms of a given element contain the same number of protons. The number of neutrons in an element may vary. Atoms of an element with different numbers of neutrons are called isotopes. Consider carbon as an example. Two isotopes of carbon are shown in Figure 11.15. Compare their protons and neutrons. Both contain 6 protons. But carbon-12 has 6 neutrons and carbon-14 has 8 neutrons. Almost all carbon atoms are carbon-12. This is a stable isotope of carbon. Only a tiny percentage of carbon atoms are carbon-14. Carbon-14 is unstable. Figure 11.16 shows carbon dioxide, which forms in the atmosphere from carbon-14 and oxygen. Neutrons in cosmic rays strike nitrogen atoms in the atmosphere. The nitrogen forms carbon- 14. Carbon in the atmosphere combines with oxygen to form carbon dioxide. Plants take in carbon dioxide during photosynthesis. In this way, carbon-14 enters food chains. 	stable isotope of carbon	5.c
The best-known method of radiometric dating is carbon-14 dating. A living thing takes in carbon-14 (along with stable carbon-12). As the carbon-14 decays, it is replaced with more carbon-14. After the organism dies, it stops taking in carbon. That includes carbon-14. The carbon-14 that is in its body continues to decay. So the organism contains less and less carbon-14 as time goes on. We can estimate the amount of carbon-14 that has decayed by measuring the amount of carbon-14 to carbon-12. We know how fast carbon-14 decays. With this information, we can tell how long ago the organism died. Carbon-14 has a relatively short half-life. It decays quickly compared to some other unstable isotopes. So carbon- 14 dating is useful for specimens younger than 50,000 years old. Thats a blink of an eye in geologic time. But radiocarbon dating is very useful for more recent events. One important use of radiocarbon is early human sites. Carbon-14 dating is also limited to the remains of once-living things. To date rocks, scientists use other radioactive isotopes. 	radioactive element with a relatively short halflife	6.b
Radioactive decay is the breakdown of unstable elements into stable elements. To understand this process, recall that the atoms of all elements contain the particles protons, neutrons, and electrons. 	breakdown of unstable elements into stable elements	7.e
This model for how the Moon formed is the best fit of all of the data scientists have about the Moon. In the early solar system there was a lot of space debris. Asteroids flew around, sometimes striking the planets. An asteroid the size of Mars smashed into Earth. The huge amount of energy from the impact melted most of Earth. The asteroid melted too. Material from both Earth and the asteroid was thrown out into orbit. Over time, this material smashed together to form our Moon. The lunar surface is about 4.5 billion years old. This means that the collision happened about 70 million years after Earth formed. 	ring of icy debris just beyond neptune	1. f
Our solar system began about 5 billion years ago. The Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time. 	example of an object in the solar system	2. c
Our solar system began about 5 billion years ago. The Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time. 	water in the gaseous state	3.e
Earths first atmosphere was different from the current one. The gases came from two sources. Volcanoes spewed gases into the air. Comets carried in ices from outer space. These ices warmed and became gases. Nitrogen, carbon dioxide, hydrogen, and water vapor, or water in gas form, were in the first atmosphere (Figure 12.5). Take a look at the list of gases. Whats missing? The early atmosphere had almost no oxygen. 	gas missing from earths early atmosphere	4.g
Temperatures and pressures at the center of the cloud were extreme. It was so hot that nuclear fusion reactions began. In these reactions hydrogen fuses to make helium. Extreme amounts of energy are released. Our Sun became a star! Material in the disk surrounding the Sun collided. Small particles collided and became rocks. Rocks collided and became boulders. Eventually planets formed from the material (Figure 12.2). Dwarf plants, comets, and asteroids formed too (Figure 12.3). 	reaction in which hydrogen atoms change to helium	5.b
Our solar system began about 5 billion years ago. The Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time. 	giant cloud of gas and dust from which the solar system formed	6.d
An atmosphere is the gases that surround a planet. The early Earth had no atmosphere. Conditions were so hot that gases were not stable. 	gases that surround a planet	7.a
Our solar system began about 5 billion years ago. The Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time. 	the solar system formed from a giant mass of gas and dust	true
Our solar system began about 5 billion years ago. The Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time. 	the sun formed billions of years before other objects in the solar system	false
Our solar system began about 5 billion years ago. The Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time. 	the solar nebula formed a disk before it formed the sun	true
Earths first atmosphere was different from the current one. The gases came from two sources. Volcanoes spewed gases into the air. Comets carried in ices from outer space. These ices warmed and became gases. Nitrogen, carbon dioxide, hydrogen, and water vapor, or water in gas form, were in the first atmosphere (Figure 12.5). Take a look at the list of gases. Whats missing? The early atmosphere had almost no oxygen. 	the first atmosphere contained nitrogen carbon dioxide oxygen and hydrogen	false
Our solar system began about 5 billion years ago. The Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time. 	objects in our solar system include dwarf planets	true
Our solar system began about 5 billion years ago. The Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time. 	all of the stars in the universe formed at around the same time as our sun	false
An atmosphere is the gases that surround a planet. The early Earth had no atmosphere. Conditions were so hot that gases were not stable. 	as earth formed gravity pulled lighter materials to the center of the planet	false
Earths atmosphere slowly cooled. Once it was cooler, water vapor could condense. It changed back to its liquid form. Liquid water could fall to Earths surface as rain. Over millions of years water collected to form the oceans. Water began to cycle on Earth as water evaporated from the oceans and returned again as rainfall. 	earths mantle is made entirely of liquid rock	false
Our solar system began about 5 billion years ago. The Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time. 	the sun planets and other solar system objects formed at about the same time	true
Our solar system began about 5 billion years ago. The Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time. 	there was a lot of space debris in the early solar system	true
An atmosphere is the gases that surround a planet. The early Earth had no atmosphere. Conditions were so hot that gases were not stable. 	early earth was much like earth today	false
An atmosphere is the gases that surround a planet. The early Earth had no atmosphere. Conditions were so hot that gases were not stable. 	before there was an ocean there was water vapor in the atmosphere	true
Our solar system began about 5 billion years ago. The Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time. 	earths moon began as a dwarf planet orbiting the sun	false
An atmosphere is the gases that surround a planet. The early Earth had no atmosphere. Conditions were so hot that gases were not stable. 	from the time it first formed earth has always had an atmosphere	false
An atmosphere is the gases that surround a planet. The early Earth had no atmosphere. Conditions were so hot that gases were not stable. 	some of the gases in earths early atmosphere came from comets	true
The first organisms to photosynthesize were cyanobacteria. These organisms may have been around as far back as 3.5 billion years and are still alive today (Figure 12.7). Now they are called blue-green algae. They are common in lakes and seas and account for 20% to 30% of photosynthesis today. 	prokaryoes are more common than eukaryotes	false
Life probably began in the oceans. No one knows exactly how or when. Life may have originated more than once. If life began before the Moon formed, that impact would have wiped it out and it would have had to originate again. Eventually conditions on Earth became less violent. The planet could support life. The first organisms were made of only one cell (Figure 12.6). The earliest cells were prokaryotes. Prokaryotic cells are surrounded by a cell membrane, but they do not have a nucleus. The cells got their nutrients directly from the water. The cells needed to use these nutrients to live and grow. The cells also needed to be able to make copies of themselves. To do this they stored genetic information in nucleic acids. The two nucleic acids are DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and RNA (ribonucleic acid). Nucleic acids pass 	dna is short for deoxyribonucleic acid	true
There are times in Earth history when all of the continents came together to form a supercontinent. Supercontinents come together and then break apart. Pangaea was the last supercontinent on Earth, but it was not the first. The supercontinent before Pangaea is called Rodinia. Rodinia contained about 75% of the continental landmass that is present today. The supercontinent came together about 1.1 billion years ago. Rodinia was not the first supercontinent either. Scientists think that three supercontinents came before Rodina, making five so far in Earth history. 	rodinia was the first supercontinent	false
Since the early Earth was very hot, mantle convection was very rapid. Plate tectonics likely moved very quickly. The early Earth was a very active place with abundant volcanic eruptions and earthquakes. The remnants of these early rocks are now seen in the ancient cores of the continents. 	early in earth history mantle convection was super fast	true
For life to become even more complex, multicellular organisms needed to evolve. Prokaryotes and eukaryotes can be multicellular. Toward the end of the Precambrian, the Ediacara Fauna evolved (Figure 12.8). These are the fossils discovered by Walcott in the introduction to the next section. The Ediacara was extremely diverse. They appeared after Earth defrosted from a worldwide glaciation. The Ediacara fauna seem to have died out. Other multicellular organisms appeared in the Phanerozoic. 	the evolution from prokaryotes to eukaryotes to multicellular organisms took a few million years	false
Life probably began in the oceans. No one knows exactly how or when. Life may have originated more than once. If life began before the Moon formed, that impact would have wiped it out and it would have had to originate again. Eventually conditions on Earth became less violent. The planet could support life. The first organisms were made of only one cell (Figure 12.6). The earliest cells were prokaryotes. Prokaryotic cells are surrounded by a cell membrane, but they do not have a nucleus. The cells got their nutrients directly from the water. The cells needed to use these nutrients to live and grow. The cells also needed to be able to make copies of themselves. To do this they stored genetic information in nucleic acids. The two nucleic acids are DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and RNA (ribonucleic acid). Nucleic acids pass 	nucleic acids in living things include dna and rna	true
The earliest crust was probably basalt. It may have resembled the current seafloor. This crust formed before there were any oceans. More than 4 billion years ago, continental crust appeared. The first continents were very small compared with those today. 	continental crust first appeared on earth about 2 billion years ago	false
The earliest crust was probably basalt. It may have resembled the current seafloor. This crust formed before there were any oceans. More than 4 billion years ago, continental crust appeared. The first continents were very small compared with those today. 	the first continents on earth were very large compared with those today	false
There are times in Earth history when all of the continents came together to form a supercontinent. Supercontinents come together and then break apart. Pangaea was the last supercontinent on Earth, but it was not the first. The supercontinent before Pangaea is called Rodinia. Rodinia contained about 75% of the continental landmass that is present today. The supercontinent came together about 1.1 billion years ago. Rodinia was not the first supercontinent either. Scientists think that three supercontinents came before Rodina, making five so far in Earth history. 	pangaea was the first supercontinent to form on earth	false
For the first 4 billion years of Earth history there is only a little evidence of life. Organisms were tiny and soft and did not fossilize well. But scientists use a variety of ways to figure out what this early life was like. 	life may have originated on earth more than once	true
Early cells took nutrients from the water. Eventually the nutrients would have become less abundant. Around 3 billion years ago, photosynthesis began. Organisms could make their own food from sunlight and inorganic molecules. From these ingredients they made chemical energy that they used. Oxygen is a waste product of photosynthesis. That first oxygen combined with iron to create iron oxide. Later on, the oxygen entered the atmosphere. Some of the oxygen in the atmosphere became ozone. The ozone layer formed to protect Earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation. This made the environment able to support more complex life forms. 	the first oxygen on earth combined with iron to form iron oxide	true
Early cells took nutrients from the water. Eventually the nutrients would have become less abundant. Around 3 billion years ago, photosynthesis began. Organisms could make their own food from sunlight and inorganic molecules. From these ingredients they made chemical energy that they used. Oxygen is a waste product of photosynthesis. That first oxygen combined with iron to create iron oxide. Later on, the oxygen entered the atmosphere. Some of the oxygen in the atmosphere became ozone. The ozone layer formed to protect Earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation. This made the environment able to support more complex life forms. 	some of the oxygen in earths early atmosphere became ozone	true
For the first 4 billion years of Earth history there is only a little evidence of life. Organisms were tiny and soft and did not fossilize well. But scientists use a variety of ways to figure out what this early life was like. 	the first photosynthetic organisms were most like modern e coli	false
For the first 4 billion years of Earth history there is only a little evidence of life. Organisms were tiny and soft and did not fossilize well. But scientists use a variety of ways to figure out what this early life was like. 	there are no longer any prokaryotes living on earth	false
For life to become even more complex, multicellular organisms needed to evolve. Prokaryotes and eukaryotes can be multicellular. Toward the end of the Precambrian, the Ediacara Fauna evolved (Figure 12.8). These are the fossils discovered by Walcott in the introduction to the next section. The Ediacara was extremely diverse. They appeared after Earth defrosted from a worldwide glaciation. The Ediacara fauna seem to have died out. Other multicellular organisms appeared in the Phanerozoic. 	ediacara fauna evolved toward the end of the precambrian era	true
The first organisms to photosynthesize were cyanobacteria. These organisms may have been around as far back as 3.5 billion years and are still alive today (Figure 12.7). Now they are called blue-green algae. They are common in lakes and seas and account for 20% to 30% of photosynthesis today. 	first organisms to make food by photosynthesis	1.e
Eukaryotes evolved about 2 billion years ago. Unlike prokaryotes, eukaryotes have a cell nucleus. They have more structures and are better organized. Organelles within a eukaryote can perform certain functions. Some supply energy; some break down wastes. Eukaryotes were better able to live and so became the dominant life form. 	type of organism that contains a nucleus in its cells	2.c
Early cells took nutrients from the water. Eventually the nutrients would have become less abundant. Around 3 billion years ago, photosynthesis began. Organisms could make their own food from sunlight and inorganic molecules. From these ingredients they made chemical energy that they used. Oxygen is a waste product of photosynthesis. That first oxygen combined with iron to create iron oxide. Later on, the oxygen entered the atmosphere. Some of the oxygen in the atmosphere became ozone. The ozone layer formed to protect Earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation. This made the environment able to support more complex life forms. 	process that added oxygen to earths early atmosphere	3.g
For the first 4 billion years of Earth history there is only a little evidence of life. Organisms were tiny and soft and did not fossilize well. But scientists use a variety of ways to figure out what this early life was like. 	gas that protects earth from harmful radiation	4.f
Eukaryotes evolved about 2 billion years ago. Unlike prokaryotes, eukaryotes have a cell nucleus. They have more structures and are better organized. Organelles within a eukaryote can perform certain functions. Some supply energy; some break down wastes. Eukaryotes were better able to live and so became the dominant life form. 	type of organism that lacks a nucleus in its cells	5.d
Life probably began in the oceans. No one knows exactly how or when. Life may have originated more than once. If life began before the Moon formed, that impact would have wiped it out and it would have had to originate again. Eventually conditions on Earth became less violent. The planet could support life. The first organisms were made of only one cell (Figure 12.6). The earliest cells were prokaryotes. Prokaryotic cells are surrounded by a cell membrane, but they do not have a nucleus. The cells got their nutrients directly from the water. The cells needed to use these nutrients to live and grow. The cells also needed to be able to make copies of themselves. To do this they stored genetic information in nucleic acids. The two nucleic acids are DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and RNA (ribonucleic acid). Nucleic acids pass 	organic compound that stores genetic information	6.a
Early cells took nutrients from the water. Eventually the nutrients would have become less abundant. Around 3 billion years ago, photosynthesis began. Organisms could make their own food from sunlight and inorganic molecules. From these ingredients they made chemical energy that they used. Oxygen is a waste product of photosynthesis. That first oxygen combined with iron to create iron oxide. Later on, the oxygen entered the atmosphere. Some of the oxygen in the atmosphere became ozone. The ozone layer formed to protect Earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation. This made the environment able to support more complex life forms. 	waste product of photosynthesis	7.b
Earth is often called the water planet. Figure 13.1 shows why. If astronauts see Earth from space, this is how it looks. Notice how blue the planet appears. Thats because oceans cover much of Earths surface. Water is also found in the clouds that rise above the planet. Most of Earths water is salt water in the oceans. As Figure 13.2 shows, only 3 percent of Earths water is fresh. Freshwater is water that contains little or no dissolved salt. Most freshwater is frozen in ice caps and glaciers. Glaciers cover the peaks of some tall mountains. For example, the Cascades Mountains in North America and the Alps Mountains in Europe are capped with ice. Ice caps cover vast areas of Antarctica and Greenland. Chunks of ice frequently break off ice caps. They form icebergs that float in the oceans. 	icebergs are made of frozen salt water	false
Did you ever wonder where the water in your glass came from or where its been? The next time you take a drink of water, think about this. Each water molecule has probably been around for billions of years. Thats because Earths water is constantly recycled. 	almost 80 percent of earths fresh water is frozen	true
Did you ever wonder where the water in your glass came from or where its been? The next time you take a drink of water, think about this. Each water molecule has probably been around for billions of years. Thats because Earths water is constantly recycled. 	there is more water in earths living things than there is in the atmosphere	false
Water keeps changing state as it goes through the water cycle. This means that it can be a solid, liquid, or gas. How does water change state? How does it keep moving through the cycle? As Figure 13.3 shows, several processes are involved. Evaporation changes liquid water to water vapor. Energy from the Sun causes water to evaporate. Most evaporation is from the oceans because they cover so much area. The water vapor rises into the atmosphere. Transpiration is like evaporation because it changes liquid water to water vapor. In transpiration, plants release water vapor through their leaves. This water vapor rises into the atmosphere. Condensation changes water vapor to liquid water. As air rises higher into the atmosphere, it cools. Cool air can hold less water vapor than warm air. So some of the water vapor condenses into water droplets. Water droplets may form clouds. Precipitation is water that falls from clouds to Earths surface. Water droplets in clouds fall to Earth when they become too large to stay aloft. The water falls as rain if the air is warm. If the air is cold, the water may freeze and fall as snow, sleet, or hail. Most precipitation falls into the oceans. Some falls on land. Runoff is precipitation that flows over the surface of the land. This water may travel to a river, lake, or ocean. Runoff may pick up fertilizer and other pollutants and deliver them to the water body where it ends up. In this way, runoff may pollute bodies of water. Infiltration is the process by which water soaks into the ground. Some of the water may seep deep under- ground. Some may stay in the soil, where plants can absorb it with their roots. In all these ways, water keeps cycling. The water cycle repeats over and over again. Who knows? Maybe a water molecule that you drink today once quenched the thirst of a dinosaur. 	soil moisture is important for plants to grow	true
Did you ever wonder where the water in your glass came from or where its been? The next time you take a drink of water, think about this. Each water molecule has probably been around for billions of years. Thats because Earths water is constantly recycled. 	some water molecules may be billions of years old	true
Water is a simple chemical compound. Each molecule of water contains two hydrogen atoms (H2 ) and one oxygen atom (O). Thats why the chemical formula for water is H2 O. If water is so simple, why is it special? Water is one of the few substances that exists on Earth in all three states of matter. Water occurs as a gas, a liquid and a solid. You drink liquid water and use it to shower. You breathe gaseous water vapor in the air. You may go ice skating on a pond covered with solid water ice in the winter. 	water exists on earth in all three states of matter	true
Water is recycled through the water cycle. The water cycle is the movement of water through the oceans, atmo- sphere, land, and living things. The water cycle is powered by energy from the Sun. Figure 13.3 diagrams the water cycle. 	the water cycle has no beginning or end	true
Water is recycled through the water cycle. The water cycle is the movement of water through the oceans, atmo- sphere, land, and living things. The water cycle is powered by energy from the Sun. Figure 13.3 diagrams the water cycle. 	water can go through the water cycle without changing state	false
Water is a simple chemical compound. Each molecule of water contains two hydrogen atoms (H2 ) and one oxygen atom (O). Thats why the chemical formula for water is H2 O. If water is so simple, why is it special? Water is one of the few substances that exists on Earth in all three states of matter. Water occurs as a gas, a liquid and a solid. You drink liquid water and use it to shower. You breathe gaseous water vapor in the air. You may go ice skating on a pond covered with solid water ice in the winter. 	water turns to gas through condensation	false
Water is recycled through the water cycle. The water cycle is the movement of water through the oceans, atmo- sphere, land, and living things. The water cycle is powered by energy from the Sun. Figure 13.3 diagrams the water cycle. 	most condensation of water takes place in the oceans	false
Water is a simple chemical compound. Each molecule of water contains two hydrogen atoms (H2 ) and one oxygen atom (O). Thats why the chemical formula for water is H2 O. If water is so simple, why is it special? Water is one of the few substances that exists on Earth in all three states of matter. Water occurs as a gas, a liquid and a solid. You drink liquid water and use it to shower. You breathe gaseous water vapor in the air. You may go ice skating on a pond covered with solid water ice in the winter. 	the atoms that make up water molecules come together and break apart easily	false
Water keeps changing state as it goes through the water cycle. This means that it can be a solid, liquid, or gas. How does water change state? How does it keep moving through the cycle? As Figure 13.3 shows, several processes are involved. Evaporation changes liquid water to water vapor. Energy from the Sun causes water to evaporate. Most evaporation is from the oceans because they cover so much area. The water vapor rises into the atmosphere. Transpiration is like evaporation because it changes liquid water to water vapor. In transpiration, plants release water vapor through their leaves. This water vapor rises into the atmosphere. Condensation changes water vapor to liquid water. As air rises higher into the atmosphere, it cools. Cool air can hold less water vapor than warm air. So some of the water vapor condenses into water droplets. Water droplets may form clouds. Precipitation is water that falls from clouds to Earths surface. Water droplets in clouds fall to Earth when they become too large to stay aloft. The water falls as rain if the air is warm. If the air is cold, the water may freeze and fall as snow, sleet, or hail. Most precipitation falls into the oceans. Some falls on land. Runoff is precipitation that flows over the surface of the land. This water may travel to a river, lake, or ocean. Runoff may pick up fertilizer and other pollutants and deliver them to the water body where it ends up. In this way, runoff may pollute bodies of water. Infiltration is the process by which water soaks into the ground. Some of the water may seep deep under- ground. Some may stay in the soil, where plants can absorb it with their roots. In all these ways, water keeps cycling. The water cycle repeats over and over again. Who knows? Maybe a water molecule that you drink today once quenched the thirst of a dinosaur. 	cold air can hold less water than warm air so when air cools water may condense	true
Water keeps changing state as it goes through the water cycle. This means that it can be a solid, liquid, or gas. How does water change state? How does it keep moving through the cycle? As Figure 13.3 shows, several processes are involved. Evaporation changes liquid water to water vapor. Energy from the Sun causes water to evaporate. Most evaporation is from the oceans because they cover so much area. The water vapor rises into the atmosphere. Transpiration is like evaporation because it changes liquid water to water vapor. In transpiration, plants release water vapor through their leaves. This water vapor rises into the atmosphere. Condensation changes water vapor to liquid water. As air rises higher into the atmosphere, it cools. Cool air can hold less water vapor than warm air. So some of the water vapor condenses into water droplets. Water droplets may form clouds. Precipitation is water that falls from clouds to Earths surface. Water droplets in clouds fall to Earth when they become too large to stay aloft. The water falls as rain if the air is warm. If the air is cold, the water may freeze and fall as snow, sleet, or hail. Most precipitation falls into the oceans. Some falls on land. Runoff is precipitation that flows over the surface of the land. This water may travel to a river, lake, or ocean. Runoff may pick up fertilizer and other pollutants and deliver them to the water body where it ends up. In this way, runoff may pollute bodies of water. Infiltration is the process by which water soaks into the ground. Some of the water may seep deep under- ground. Some may stay in the soil, where plants can absorb it with their roots. In all these ways, water keeps cycling. The water cycle repeats over and over again. Who knows? Maybe a water molecule that you drink today once quenched the thirst of a dinosaur. 	water that forms clouds always falls to the ground as precipitation	false
Water is recycled through the water cycle. The water cycle is the movement of water through the oceans, atmo- sphere, land, and living things. The water cycle is powered by energy from the Sun. Figure 13.3 diagrams the water cycle. 	runoff may pollute rivers lakes and oceans	true
Did you ever wonder where the water in your glass came from or where its been? The next time you take a drink of water, think about this. Each water molecule has probably been around for billions of years. Thats because Earths water is constantly recycled. 	most of earths precipitation falls on land	false
Did you ever wonder where the water in your glass came from or where its been? The next time you take a drink of water, think about this. Each water molecule has probably been around for billions of years. Thats because Earths water is constantly recycled. 	water that falls from clouds to earths surface	1.f
Water is recycled through the water cycle. The water cycle is the movement of water through the oceans, atmo- sphere, land, and living things. The water cycle is powered by energy from the Sun. Figure 13.3 diagrams the water cycle. 	continuous movement of water through the oceans atmosphere land and living things	2.d
Water keeps changing state as it goes through the water cycle. This means that it can be a solid, liquid, or gas. How does water change state? How does it keep moving through the cycle? As Figure 13.3 shows, several processes are involved. Evaporation changes liquid water to water vapor. Energy from the Sun causes water to evaporate. Most evaporation is from the oceans because they cover so much area. The water vapor rises into the atmosphere. Transpiration is like evaporation because it changes liquid water to water vapor. In transpiration, plants release water vapor through their leaves. This water vapor rises into the atmosphere. Condensation changes water vapor to liquid water. As air rises higher into the atmosphere, it cools. Cool air can hold less water vapor than warm air. So some of the water vapor condenses into water droplets. Water droplets may form clouds. Precipitation is water that falls from clouds to Earths surface. Water droplets in clouds fall to Earth when they become too large to stay aloft. The water falls as rain if the air is warm. If the air is cold, the water may freeze and fall as snow, sleet, or hail. Most precipitation falls into the oceans. Some falls on land. Runoff is precipitation that flows over the surface of the land. This water may travel to a river, lake, or ocean. Runoff may pick up fertilizer and other pollutants and deliver them to the water body where it ends up. In this way, runoff may pollute bodies of water. Infiltration is the process by which water soaks into the ground. Some of the water may seep deep under- ground. Some may stay in the soil, where plants can absorb it with their roots. In all these ways, water keeps cycling. The water cycle repeats over and over again. Who knows? Maybe a water molecule that you drink today once quenched the thirst of a dinosaur. 	process in which plants release water vapor through their leaves	3.e
Water keeps changing state as it goes through the water cycle. This means that it can be a solid, liquid, or gas. How does water change state? How does it keep moving through the cycle? As Figure 13.3 shows, several processes are involved. Evaporation changes liquid water to water vapor. Energy from the Sun causes water to evaporate. Most evaporation is from the oceans because they cover so much area. The water vapor rises into the atmosphere. Transpiration is like evaporation because it changes liquid water to water vapor. In transpiration, plants release water vapor through their leaves. This water vapor rises into the atmosphere. Condensation changes water vapor to liquid water. As air rises higher into the atmosphere, it cools. Cool air can hold less water vapor than warm air. So some of the water vapor condenses into water droplets. Water droplets may form clouds. Precipitation is water that falls from clouds to Earths surface. Water droplets in clouds fall to Earth when they become too large to stay aloft. The water falls as rain if the air is warm. If the air is cold, the water may freeze and fall as snow, sleet, or hail. Most precipitation falls into the oceans. Some falls on land. Runoff is precipitation that flows over the surface of the land. This water may travel to a river, lake, or ocean. Runoff may pick up fertilizer and other pollutants and deliver them to the water body where it ends up. In this way, runoff may pollute bodies of water. Infiltration is the process by which water soaks into the ground. Some of the water may seep deep under- ground. Some may stay in the soil, where plants can absorb it with their roots. In all these ways, water keeps cycling. The water cycle repeats over and over again. Who knows? Maybe a water molecule that you drink today once quenched the thirst of a dinosaur. 	precipitation that flows over the surface of the ground	4.g
Water is a simple chemical compound. Each molecule of water contains two hydrogen atoms (H2 ) and one oxygen atom (O). Thats why the chemical formula for water is H2 O. If water is so simple, why is it special? Water is one of the few substances that exists on Earth in all three states of matter. Water occurs as a gas, a liquid and a solid. You drink liquid water and use it to shower. You breathe gaseous water vapor in the air. You may go ice skating on a pond covered with solid water ice in the winter. 	process in which water vapor changes to liquid water	5. a
Water is a simple chemical compound. Each molecule of water contains two hydrogen atoms (H2 ) and one oxygen atom (O). Thats why the chemical formula for water is H2 O. If water is so simple, why is it special? Water is one of the few substances that exists on Earth in all three states of matter. Water occurs as a gas, a liquid and a solid. You drink liquid water and use it to shower. You breathe gaseous water vapor in the air. You may go ice skating on a pond covered with solid water ice in the winter. 	process in which liquid water changes to water vapor	6. b
Water keeps changing state as it goes through the water cycle. This means that it can be a solid, liquid, or gas. How does water change state? How does it keep moving through the cycle? As Figure 13.3 shows, several processes are involved. Evaporation changes liquid water to water vapor. Energy from the Sun causes water to evaporate. Most evaporation is from the oceans because they cover so much area. The water vapor rises into the atmosphere. Transpiration is like evaporation because it changes liquid water to water vapor. In transpiration, plants release water vapor through their leaves. This water vapor rises into the atmosphere. Condensation changes water vapor to liquid water. As air rises higher into the atmosphere, it cools. Cool air can hold less water vapor than warm air. So some of the water vapor condenses into water droplets. Water droplets may form clouds. Precipitation is water that falls from clouds to Earths surface. Water droplets in clouds fall to Earth when they become too large to stay aloft. The water falls as rain if the air is warm. If the air is cold, the water may freeze and fall as snow, sleet, or hail. Most precipitation falls into the oceans. Some falls on land. Runoff is precipitation that flows over the surface of the land. This water may travel to a river, lake, or ocean. Runoff may pick up fertilizer and other pollutants and deliver them to the water body where it ends up. In this way, runoff may pollute bodies of water. Infiltration is the process by which water soaks into the ground. Some of the water may seep deep under- ground. Some may stay in the soil, where plants can absorb it with their roots. In all these ways, water keeps cycling. The water cycle repeats over and over again. Who knows? Maybe a water molecule that you drink today once quenched the thirst of a dinosaur. 	process in which water soaks into the ground	7. c
