study of earths weather	Do they try to predict the chain reactions that could occur when one part of the ecosystem is disrupted?
study of earthquakes	Do they try to predict the chain reactions that could occur when one part of the ecosystem is disrupted?
study of earths oceans	Do they try to predict the chain reactions that could occur when one part of the ecosystem is disrupted?
study of solid earth	Do they try to predict the chain reactions that could occur when one part of the ecosystem is disrupted?
study of human effects on earth	Do they try to predict the chain reactions that could occur when one part of the ecosystem is disrupted?
study of all aspects of planet earth	Do they try to predict the chain reactions that could occur when one part of the ecosystem is disrupted?
study of the universe	Do they try to predict the chain reactions that could occur when one part of the ecosystem is disrupted?
earth science is a branch of geology	Do 12)?
some geologists specialize in the study of soil	Do 12)?
rock layers below earths surface are a record of earths history	Do 12)?
the science of oceanography started with mapping the oceans	Do marine biology looks at marine life?
scientists have not yet visited the deepest parts of the ocean	Do marine biology looks at marine life?
most of earths water is in rivers and lakes	Do 12)?
humans have had relatively little impact on the oceans	Do they try to predict the chain reactions that could occur when one part of the ecosystem is disrupted?
there are several branches of oceanography	Do marine biology looks at marine life?
meteorologists study meteors	Do 15)?
the burning of fossil fuels contributes to global warming	Do 15)?
flowing water can cause erosion by dissolving minerals in rocks	Do all these types of flowing water can cause erosion and deposition?
more slowly flowing water can carry larger sediments	Do streams with a lot of water flow faster than streams that are nearly dry?
the size of sediments determines how they are carried by flowing water	Do in this process, the particles roll or drag along the bottom of the water?
clay and silt are carried in flowing water by suspension	Do in this process, the particles roll or drag along the bottom of the water?
runoff is only a minor cause of soil erosion	Do all these types of flowing water can cause erosion and deposition?
rapidly flowing mountain streams cause little deposition	Do all these types of flowing water can cause erosion and deposition?
slowly flowing rivers erode their channels more at the bottom than at the sides	Do this forms an oxbow lake, like the one in Figure 10.6?
floodplains are poor places for growing crops	Do levees occur because floodwaters deposit their biggest sediments first when they overflow the rivers banks?
a levee forms from the largest sediments a river carries	Do an example is shown in Figure 10.7?
sinkholes are caused by groundwater erosion	Do some sinkholes are big enough to swallow vehicles and buildings?
broad flat area on both sides of a river where it floods its banks	Do this forms an oxbow lake, like the one in Figure 10.6?
underground hole or cavern eroded by groundwater	Do underground water can also erode and deposit material?
deposit that forms when a mountain stream flows suddenly onto flatter land	Do the smallest particles settle out last?
raised strip of sediments deposited along the bank of a river	Do levees occur because floodwaters deposit their biggest sediments first when they overflow the rivers banks?
hole on the surface of the ground that forms when a cave collapses	Do some sinkholes are big enough to swallow vehicles and buildings?
triangular deposit that forms when a river empties into a body of still water	Do an example is shown in Figure 10.7?
body of water that forms when a meander is cut off from the rest of the river	Do this forms an oxbow lake, like the one in Figure 10.6?
landform that results when a sandbar builds up enough to rise above the waters surface	Do you can see examples of these landforms in Figure 10.17?
artificial barrier parallel to a shore that reduces beach erosion	Do it runs parallel to the coast like a barrier island?
landform that results when waves create a hole in a wavecut cliff	Do this leaves behind pillars of rock?
artificial barrier perpendicular to the shore that reduces erosion by longshore drift	Do you can see how groins work in Figure 10.19?
landform that results when waves erode the top of a sea arch	Do this leaves behind pillars of rock?
underwater ridge of sand running parallel to shore that is deposited by waves	Do you can see examples of these landforms in Figure 10.17?
ridge of sand extending out from shore that is caused by longshore drift	Do you can see examples of these landforms in Figure 10.17?
bigger waves can carry more sediment	Do the bigger the waves are and the more sediment they carry, the more erosion they cause?
the smallest sediments in ocean water are deposited on the shore	Do this is where waves and other motions are strongest?
most waves strike the shore at an angle rather than straight on	Do 15 and at the link below?
longshore drift carries sediments far inland	Do you can see examples of these landforms in Figure 10.17?
groins are built to prevent the formation of sandbars	Do you can see examples of these landforms in Figure 10.17?
sediment in ocean water scrapes rocks like sandpaper	Do the bigger the waves are and the more sediment they carry, the more erosion they cause?
longshore drift moves sand opposite to the direction of prevailing winds	Do 15 and at the link below?
the end of a spit may hook around toward the open ocean	Do you can see examples of these landforms in Figure 10.17?
a barrier island is generally small and round in shape	Do it runs parallel to the coast like a barrier island?
sand collects on both sides of a groin	Do you can see how groins work in Figure 10.19?
glaciers presently cover about 40 percent of earths surface	Do valley glaciers form in mountains and flow downhill through mountain river valleys?
continental glaciers are long and narrow	Do valley glaciers form in mountains and flow downhill through mountain river valleys?
valley glaciers flow downhill through river valleys	Do valley glaciers form in mountains and flow downhill through mountain river valleys?
continental glaciers form cirques and horns	Do valley glaciers form in mountains and flow downhill through mountain river valleys?
a glacier picks up sediments when they freeze to ice at the bottom of the glacier	Do they may also leave scratches and grooves that show the direction the glacier moved?
the narrow end of a drumlin points in the direction that the glacier moved	Do they may also leave scratches and grooves that show the direction the glacier moved?
all glaciers move because of gravity	Do they may also leave scratches and grooves that show the direction the glacier moved?
the main way glaciers cause erosion is by ice wedging	Do they may also leave scratches and grooves that show the direction the glacier moved?
glaciers are getting smaller because of global warming	Do they may also leave scratches and grooves that show the direction the glacier moved?
the valley carved by a mountain glacier has gently sloping walls	Do a horn is a sharp peak that is left behind when glacial cirques are on at least three sides of a mountain?
rounded hollow carved in the side of a mountain by a glacier	Do a horn is a sharp peak that is left behind when glacial cirques are on at least three sides of a mountain?
type of glacier that is spread out over a large area	Do valley glaciers form in mountains and flow downhill through mountain river valleys?
long low hill of sediments deposited by a glacier	Do the meltwater filled it to form a lake?
type of glacier that forms in mountains	Do valley glaciers form in mountains and flow downhill through mountain river valleys?
winding ridge of sand deposited by a stream of meltwater	Do the meltwater filled it to form a lake?
jagged ridge that remains when two cirques form on opposite sides of a mountain	Do a horn is a sharp peak that is left behind when glacial cirques are on at least three sides of a mountain?
sharp peak that is left behind when glaciers erode all sides of a mountain	Do a horn is a sharp peak that is left behind when glacial cirques are on at least three sides of a mountain?
preserved traces can include burrows	Do most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks?
scientists have discovered fossil footprints	Do fossils are our best clues about the history of life on Earth?
complete preservation occurs only when remains are preserved in rock	Do most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks?
in the past fossils inspired legends of monsters	Do most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks?
it is very likely that any given organism will become a fossil	Do fossils of soft organisms, from bacteria to jellyfish, are very rare?
fossils in older rocks are more similar to animals that live today than fossils in younger rocks	Do most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks?
fossils of ocean animals have been found at the top of mt everest	Do the fossil plants show that Antarctica once had a much warmer climate?
fossils form when remains are replaced by minerals	Do most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks?
fossils show that antarctica once had a much warmer climate	Do the fossil plants show that Antarctica once had a much warmer climate?
index fossils are the first fossils ever discovered of an extinct species	Do most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks?
complete preservation is valuable because scientists can study the organisms dna	Do fossils are our best clues about the history of life on Earth?
there are no plants in antarctica so there are no plant fossils there	Do most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks?
teeth are more likely than feathers to be preserved as fossils	Do most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks?
people first started discovering fossils about 150 years ago	Do most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks?
all fossils form when remains of dead organisms are covered with sediments	Do most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks?
dark stain in rock left by the remains of an organism	Do fossilization is illustrated in Figure 11.2?
preserved tracks or other evidence of an organism that lived in the past	Do most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks?
type of fossil that can be used to determine the age of rock layers	Do different species of trilobite fossils can be used to narrow the age even more?
process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils	Do most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks?
type of fossil that forms in a mold	Do you can read about them in Figure 11.3?
any preserved remains or traces of an organism that lived in the past	Do most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks?
imprint of an organism left in rock	Do fossilization is illustrated in Figure 11.2?
earths geologic processes have changed over time	Do it shows how Earths environment and life forms have changed?
extinction occurs when a species completely dies out	Do it shows how Earths environment and life forms have changed?
layers of sedimentary rock are called strata	Do if sedimentary rock layers are tilted, they must have moved after they were deposited?
the relative age of a rock is its approximate age in years	Do but what if rock layers are far apart? What if they are on different continents? What evidence is used to match rock layers in different places?
rock layers on opposite sides of the grand canyon show lateral continuity	Do the matching rock layers were deposited at the same time, so they are the same age?
key beds are rock layers that have unconformities	Do you can see how this works in Figure?
more than one type of index fossil provides stronger evidence that rock layers are the same age	Do you can see how this works in Figure?
the cretaceous period ended when the first dinosaurs appeared	Do the Jurassic Period is named for the Jura Mountains in France and Switzerland, for example?
the earliest geologic time scale showed how many years ago each era began	Do 13 shows you what the geologic time scale looks like?
fish were common organisms during the paleozoic era	Do organisms like invertebrates and fish were the most common lifeforms?
fossil b is younger than fossil a but the rock layer containing fossil b is beneath the rock layer	Do you can see how this works in Figure?
to help decipher the geologic history of a region create a geologic time scale using the rock units you	Do it lasted for about 55 million years?
james hutton thought earth was old because he saw how slowly geological processes work now	Do many of the divisions mark major events in life history?
crosscutting relationships help geologists to determine the older and younger of two rock units	Do the cut rock layers are older than the rock that cuts across them?
in the process of relative dating scientists determine the exact age of a fossil or rock	Do but what if rock layers are far apart? What if they are on different continents? What evidence is used to match rock layers in different places?
whether a rock is older or younger than other rocks	Do you can see an example in Figure 11.7?
law stating that rock layers are deposited in horizontal layers	Do if sedimentary rock layers are tilted, they must have moved after they were deposited?
law stating that rock layers closer to the surface are younger than deeper rock layers	Do you can see an example in Figure 11.7?
law stating that rock layers are older than any rocks that cut across them	Do the cut rock layers are older than the rock that cuts across them?
gap in a sequence of rock layers	Do you can see how this works in Figure?
law stating that matching nearby rock layers are the same age	Do you can see how this works in Figure?
study of rock layers	Do you can see how this works in Figure?
the number of protons in atoms of the same element may vary	Do to understand this process, recall that the atoms of all elements contain the particles protons, neutrons, and electrons?
almost all carbon atoms are atoms of carbon14	Do in this way, carbon-14 enters food chains?
when an atom of carbon14 decays it loses an electron	Do 18 graphs the rate of decay of carbon-14?
using radioactivity scientists are able to measure the relative age of some rocks	Do this type of dating is called radiometric dating?
carbon14 atoms decay to carbon13 atoms	Do to understand this process, recall that the atoms of all elements contain the particles protons, neutrons, and electrons?
radioactive isotopes gain or lose particles to become different elements	Do to understand this process, recall that the atoms of all elements contain the particles protons, neutrons, and electrons?
the halflife of a radioactive isotope is constant	Do 18 graphs the rate of decay of carbon-14?
a living thing takes in carbon14 only while it is alive	Do 18 graphs the rate of decay of carbon-14?
no one knows earths age because no isotopes are good for substances that old	Do this type of dating is called radiometric dating?
carbon14 dating can be used to determine the ages of rocks	Do this type of dating is called radiometric dating?
carbon14 loses an alpha particle which is two protons and two electrons	Do to understand this process, recall that the atoms of all elements contain the particles protons, neutrons, and electrons?
plants take in carbon14 during photosynthesis	Do in this way, carbon-14 enters food chains?
the halflife of carbon14 is 5730 years	Do 18 graphs the rate of decay of carbon-14?
all fossils can be dated with carbon14 dating	Do this type of dating is called radiometric dating?
to date a rock that is as old as earth you could use potassium40 dating	Do 5 billion?
using radioactive decay to estimate the age of a fossil or rock	Do this type of dating is called radiometric dating?
radioactive element with a relatively long halflife	Do to understand this process, recall that the atoms of all elements contain the particles protons, neutrons, and electrons?
rate of decay of a radioactive element	Do this type of dating is called radiometric dating?
atom of an element with a different number of neutrons	Do to understand this process, recall that the atoms of all elements contain the particles protons, neutrons, and electrons?
stable isotope of carbon	Do in this way, carbon-14 enters food chains?
radioactive element with a relatively short halflife	Do to date rocks, scientists use other radioactive isotopes?
breakdown of unstable elements into stable elements	Do to understand this process, recall that the atoms of all elements contain the particles protons, neutrons, and electrons?
ring of icy debris just beyond neptune	Do this means that the collision happened about 70 million years after Earth formed?
example of an object in the solar system	Do the Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time?
water in the gaseous state	Do the Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time?
gas missing from earths early atmosphere	Do whats missing? The early atmosphere had almost no oxygen?
reaction in which hydrogen atoms change to helium	Do 3)?
giant cloud of gas and dust from which the solar system formed	Do the Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time?
gases that surround a planet	Do conditions were so hot that gases were not stable?
the solar system formed from a giant mass of gas and dust	Do the Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time?
the sun formed billions of years before other objects in the solar system	Do the Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time?
the solar nebula formed a disk before it formed the sun	Do the Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time?
the first atmosphere contained nitrogen carbon dioxide oxygen and hydrogen	Do whats missing? The early atmosphere had almost no oxygen?
objects in our solar system include dwarf planets	Do the Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time?
all of the stars in the universe formed at around the same time as our sun	Do the Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time?
as earth formed gravity pulled lighter materials to the center of the planet	Do conditions were so hot that gases were not stable?
earths mantle is made entirely of liquid rock	Do water began to cycle on Earth as water evaporated from the oceans and returned again as rainfall?
the sun planets and other solar system objects formed at about the same time	Do the Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time?
there was a lot of space debris in the early solar system	Do the Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time?
early earth was much like earth today	Do conditions were so hot that gases were not stable?
before there was an ocean there was water vapor in the atmosphere	Do conditions were so hot that gases were not stable?
earths moon began as a dwarf planet orbiting the sun	Do the Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time?
from the time it first formed earth has always had an atmosphere	Do conditions were so hot that gases were not stable?
some of the gases in earths early atmosphere came from comets	Do conditions were so hot that gases were not stable?
prokaryoes are more common than eukaryotes	Do they are common in lakes and seas and account for 20% to 30% of photosynthesis today?
dna is short for deoxyribonucleic acid	Do nucleic acids pass?
rodinia was the first supercontinent	Do scientists think that three supercontinents came before Rodina, making five so far in Earth history?
early in earth history mantle convection was super fast	Do the remnants of these early rocks are now seen in the ancient cores of the continents?
the evolution from prokaryotes to eukaryotes to multicellular organisms took a few million years	Do other multicellular organisms appeared in the Phanerozoic?
nucleic acids in living things include dna and rna	Do nucleic acids pass?
continental crust first appeared on earth about 2 billion years ago	Do the first continents were very small compared with those today?
the first continents on earth were very large compared with those today	Do the first continents were very small compared with those today?
pangaea was the first supercontinent to form on earth	Do scientists think that three supercontinents came before Rodina, making five so far in Earth history?
life may have originated on earth more than once	Do but scientists use a variety of ways to figure out what this early life was like?
the first oxygen on earth combined with iron to form iron oxide	Do this made the environment able to support more complex life forms?
some of the oxygen in earths early atmosphere became ozone	Do this made the environment able to support more complex life forms?
the first photosynthetic organisms were most like modern e coli	Do but scientists use a variety of ways to figure out what this early life was like?
there are no longer any prokaryotes living on earth	Do but scientists use a variety of ways to figure out what this early life was like?
ediacara fauna evolved toward the end of the precambrian era	Do other multicellular organisms appeared in the Phanerozoic?
first organisms to make food by photosynthesis	Do they are common in lakes and seas and account for 20% to 30% of photosynthesis today?
type of organism that contains a nucleus in its cells	Do eukaryotes were better able to live and so became the dominant life form?
process that added oxygen to earths early atmosphere	Do this made the environment able to support more complex life forms?
gas that protects earth from harmful radiation	Do but scientists use a variety of ways to figure out what this early life was like?
type of organism that lacks a nucleus in its cells	Do eukaryotes were better able to live and so became the dominant life form?
organic compound that stores genetic information	Do nucleic acids pass?
waste product of photosynthesis	Do this made the environment able to support more complex life forms?
icebergs are made of frozen salt water	Do they form icebergs that float in the oceans?
almost 80 percent of earths fresh water is frozen	Do thats because Earths water is constantly recycled?
there is more water in earths living things than there is in the atmosphere	Do thats because Earths water is constantly recycled?
soil moisture is important for plants to grow	Do who knows? Maybe a water molecule that you drink today once quenched the thirst of a dinosaur?
some water molecules may be billions of years old	Do thats because Earths water is constantly recycled?
water exists on earth in all three states of matter	Do you may go ice skating on a pond covered with solid water ice in the winter?
the water cycle has no beginning or end	Do 3 diagrams the water cycle?
water can go through the water cycle without changing state	Do 3 diagrams the water cycle?
water turns to gas through condensation	Do you may go ice skating on a pond covered with solid water ice in the winter?
most condensation of water takes place in the oceans	Do 3 diagrams the water cycle?
the atoms that make up water molecules come together and break apart easily	Do you may go ice skating on a pond covered with solid water ice in the winter?
cold air can hold less water than warm air so when air cools water may condense	Do who knows? Maybe a water molecule that you drink today once quenched the thirst of a dinosaur?
water that forms clouds always falls to the ground as precipitation	Do who knows? Maybe a water molecule that you drink today once quenched the thirst of a dinosaur?
runoff may pollute rivers lakes and oceans	Do 3 diagrams the water cycle?
most of earths precipitation falls on land	Do thats because Earths water is constantly recycled?
water that falls from clouds to earths surface	Do thats because Earths water is constantly recycled?
continuous movement of water through the oceans atmosphere land and living things	Do 3 diagrams the water cycle?
process in which plants release water vapor through their leaves	Do who knows? Maybe a water molecule that you drink today once quenched the thirst of a dinosaur?
precipitation that flows over the surface of the ground	Do who knows? Maybe a water molecule that you drink today once quenched the thirst of a dinosaur?
process in which water vapor changes to liquid water	Do you may go ice skating on a pond covered with solid water ice in the winter?
process in which liquid water changes to water vapor	Do you may go ice skating on a pond covered with solid water ice in the winter?
process in which water soaks into the ground	Do who knows? Maybe a water molecule that you drink today once quenched the thirst of a dinosaur?
a brook is a type of wetland	Do what do all these forms of flowing water have in common? They are all streams?
a stream always flows from a higher to a lower elevation	Do usually, though, a large stream is called a river?
the bottom of a river channel is called the bank	Do usually, though, a large stream is called a river?
streams usually begin with water from snow melt and possibly springs	Do usually, though, a large stream is called a river?
a single stream always has just one source	Do usually, though, a large stream is called a river?
a single stream will have a single water source	Do usually, though, a large stream is called a river?
moving water slows down when it enters a body of still water	Do water leaves ponds and lakes through evaporation and also as outflow?
a rivers basin is also called its bed	Do usually, though, a large stream is called a river?
the great lakes are in basins carved by glaciers	Do water leaves ponds and lakes through evaporation and also as outflow?
a divide is the lowest point between two river basins	Do gif?
a stream is a small river	Do usually, though, a large stream is called a river?
a floodplain may be very wide and flat	Do these curves are called meanders?
all lakes have fresh water	Do water leaves ponds and lakes through evaporation and also as outflow?
sunlight may not be able to reach the bottom of a deep lake	Do how great are they? They hold 22 percent of all the worlds fresh surface water!?
the great lakes are volcanic lakes	Do water leaves ponds and lakes through evaporation and also as outflow?
small body of standing water	Do how great are they? They hold 22 percent of all the worlds fresh surface water!?
event in which a body of water overflows its banks	Do usually, though, a large stream is called a river?
area that is covered with water or has soggy soil during all or part of the year	Do wetlands can also be found at the edges of seas?
any body of fresh water that flows downhill in a channel	Do usually, though, a large stream is called a river?
large body of fresh water that flows downhill in a channel	Do usually, though, a large stream is called a river?
large body of standing water	Do how great are they? They hold 22 percent of all the worlds fresh surface water!?
all of the land drained by a river system	Do gif?
the water table in an area may rise or fall	Do the water table is higher when there is a lot of rain and lower when the weather is dry?
an aquifer usually forms in a layer of clay	Do the water that enters the aquifer is called recharge?
the rock layer below an aquifer always consists of permeable rock	Do the water that enters the aquifer is called recharge?
water in hot springs is heated by hot magma	Do the bacteria use the minerals in the hot water to make food?
very few land areas have aquifers beneath them	Do this is likely to damage any homes or other structures built above the aquifer?
aquifers are generally found at the same depths	Do the water that enters the aquifer is called recharge?
it is impossible for an aquifer to ever run dry	Do this is likely to damage any homes or other structures built above the aquifer?
the ogallala aquifer is one of the biggest aquifers in the world	Do if this continues, what might happen to the Ogallala aquifer?
land use in an area can affect the amount of water that is available to enter groundwater	Do how does this happen? And where does the water go?
much of the water taken from the ogallala aquifer is used to irrigate crops	Do if this continues, what might happen to the Ogallala aquifer?
a good aquifer has rock in it that is porous and permeable	Do the water that enters the aquifer is called recharge?
the bottom layer of an aquifer has impermeable rock	Do the water that enters the aquifer is called recharge?
many hot springs are also mineral springs	Do the bacteria use the minerals in the hot water to make food?
the water table keeps water in an aquifer from seeping deeper underground	Do the water that enters the aquifer is called recharge?
water flows out of a well due to gravity	Do the lake basin was carved by a glacier?
not having tiny holes that water can pass through	Do it cannot seep any deeper into the ground because the rock below it is impermeable?
underground rock layer that is saturated with water	Do the water that enters the aquifer is called recharge?
having tiny holes that water can pass through	Do it cannot seep any deeper into the ground because the rock below it is impermeable?
top of an underground rock layer that is saturated with water	Do the water that enters the aquifer is called recharge?
hole dug or drilled into the ground to reach an aquifer	Do a hand-cranked pulley is used to lift the bucket of water to the surface?
fresh water below earths surface	Do how does this happen? And where does the water go?
water that enters an aquifer	Do the water that enters the aquifer is called recharge?
the oceans influence earths atmosphere	Do the oceans affect the atmosphere, climate, and living things?
fewer organisms live in the oceans than on the land	Do 4, have more diversity of life forms than almost anywhere else on Earth?
early earth was too cold for liquid water to exist	Do earths early years were spent as molten rock and metal?
the dead sea is extremely saline due to high evaporation	Do by absorbing carbon dioxide, the oceans help control global warming?
oceans cover more than 70 percent of earths surface	Do the oceans affect the atmosphere, climate, and living things?
earths oceans have always had the same configuration	Do earths early years were spent as molten rock and metal?
coastal areas always have colder climates than inland areas	Do in the summer, lakes and seas might boil! Life as we know it could not exist on Earth without the oceans?
ocean water is saltier than any other water on earths surface	Do but do you know why? How salty is it?
most nutrients in the ocean are washed in from the land	Do but do you know why? How salty is it?
the amount of salt in ocean water is the same everywhere on earth	Do but do you know why? How salty is it?
about 250 million years ago there was one world ocean known as pansea	Do but do you know why? How salty is it?
the climate of inland areas is affected by oceans	Do the oceans affect the atmosphere, climate, and living things?
the water may be very deep in the neritic zone	Do so distance from shore also influences how many organisms live in the water?
nutrients may be scarce in the oceanic zone	Do so distance from shore also influences how many organisms live in the water?
temperature and pressure increase as you go deeper below the oceans surface	Do the oceans affect the atmosphere, climate, and living things?
ocean zone that is closest to shore	Do but do you know why? How salty is it?
dissolved gas in ocean water	Do but do you know why? How salty is it?
open ocean beyond the continental shelf	Do but do you know why? How salty is it?
ocean zone on the ocean floor	Do but do you know why? How salty is it?
ocean zone where sunlight does not reach	Do but do you know why? How salty is it?
main salt in ocean water	Do but do you know why? How salty is it?
ocean zone that lies over the continental shelf	Do but do you know why? How salty is it?
the highest point of a wave is its amplitude	Do its winds may blow more than 150 miles per hour! The winds also travel over long distances and may last for many days?
wavelength is the difference between a crest and a trough	Do its winds may blow more than 150 miles per hour! The winds also travel over long distances and may last for many days?
the biggest ocean waves occur with hurricanes	Do its winds may blow more than 150 miles per hour! The winds also travel over long distances and may last for many days?
the greatest cause of tides is the sun	Do this animation shows the effect of the Moon and Sun on the tides:?
waves break on shore because the water is shallow	Do when they reach the shore, the waves topple over and break?
tides are waves high tide is the crest and low tide is the trough	Do its winds may blow more than 150 miles per hour! The winds also travel over long distances and may last for many days?
all waves are caused by winds	Do 9 shows how water molecules move when a wave goes by?
tides cause water levels to rise and fall once a day	Do this is called the tidal range?
a wave is a transfer of energy that initially began with wind	Do 9 shows how water molecules move when a wave goes by?
the difference between high and low tides is the tidal range	Do this is called the tidal range?
the first sign of a tsunami is coming is high water moving fast across the ocean	Do 9 shows how water molecules move when a wave goes by?
coriolis effect is caused by earths rotation	Do this effect of Earths rotation on the direction of winds and currents is called the Coriolis effect?
the suns gravity is the main cause of earths tides	Do this creates low tides on the other two sides of the planet?
spring tides occur when the sun and moon are in a straight line	Do this animation shows the effect of the Moon and Sun on the tides:?
the coriolis effect causes surface currents to flow diagonally across the ocean	Do in the Southern Hemisphere, they flow in the opposite direction?
daily change in the level of ocean water	Do this is called the tidal range?
stream of moving water that flows through the ocean	Do in the Southern Hemisphere, they flow in the opposite direction?
tide that occurs during the first or third quarter of the moon	Do this creates low tides on the other two sides of the planet?
transfer of energy through matter	Do 9 shows how water molecules move when a wave goes by?
tide that occurs during a full moon or new moon	Do this creates low tides on the other two sides of the planet?
movement of deep ocean water to the surface	Do the nutrient-rich water that comes to the surface by upwelling supports many living things?
amount of mass per unit of volume	Do this water circulates through all of the ocean basins in deep currents?
only a tiny fraction of the ocean floor has ever been studied	Do the resources include both living and nonliving things?
the tallest mountains on earth are located on the ocean floor	Do the resources include both living and nonliving things?
earths deepest canyon is the grand canyon in the american southwest	Do the magma hardens to create the ridge?
ocean water over the abyssal plain is shallow and warm	Do the resources include both living and nonliving things?
the deepest ocean trench is 3 kilometers below sea level	Do the resources include both living and nonliving things?
the midocean ridge is created by magma that cools and hardens	Do the magma hardens to create the ridge?
most of the ocean floor is too deep for organisms to live there	Do the resources include both living and nonliving things?
the only resources on or below the ocean floor are minerals such as manganese	Do the resources include both living and nonliving things?
oil rigs floating on the ocean extract petroleum from sea water	Do the resources include both living and nonliving things?
hot water escapes through vents in the ocean floor	Do the resources include both living and nonliving things?
volcanic mountain on the ocean floor	Do the resources include both living and nonliving things?
mostly flat part of the ocean floor under the open ocean	Do the resources include both living and nonliving things?
deep canyon on the ocean floor	Do the resources include both living and nonliving things?
part of the ocean floor that lies between the continental shelf and abyssal plain	Do the resources include both living and nonliving things?
mountain range that runs through all the worlds oceans	Do the magma hardens to create the ridge?
structure on the ocean floor formed by minerals from hot water	Do the resources include both living and nonliving things?
ocean floor near the edge of a continent	Do the resources include both living and nonliving things?
nekton must live in the photic zone	Do 26 shows examples of nekton?
zooplankton may include larvae of large animals	Do they include tiny animals and fish larvae?
plankton are organisms that can swim against the current	Do 24 shows the three groups?
there is no photosynthesis at deepsea vents because there is no light	Do you know why?
if an ocean plant can photosynthesize light must be available to the plant	Do 24 shows the three groups?
all marine organisms are adapted to life in salt water	Do 24 shows the three groups?
no marine organism can withstand the extreme water pressure at the bottom of the ocean	Do 24 shows the three groups?
fish are the most numerous life forms in the ocean	Do 24 shows the three groups?
plankton range in size from bacteria to whales	Do 24 shows the three groups?
plankton always remain in one place because they cannot swim	Do 24 shows the three groups?
zooplankton feed on phytoplankton	Do they include tiny animals and fish larvae?
some nekton are mammals	Do 26 shows examples of nekton?
fish swim with their fins and gills	Do 26 shows examples of nekton?
many benthic organisms attach themselves to rocks	Do the bacteria get protection and the tubeworms get some of the food?
sea cucumbers live on the ocean floor	Do 24 shows the three groups?
marine organisms that swim	Do 24 shows the three groups?
example of zooplankton	Do they include tiny animals and fish larvae?
name for plantlike plankton	Do 24 shows the three groups?
name for animallike plankton	Do 24 shows the three groups?
general term for marine organisms that float on water	Do 24 shows the three groups?
organisms that live on the ocean floor	Do 24 shows the three groups?
example of phytoplankton	Do they include tiny animals and fish larvae?
a campfire warms the campers sitting around it by conduction	Do these forms of energy travel from the campfire to you?
energy can travel only through matter	Do these forms of energy travel from the campfire to you?
most of the energy on earth comes from the sun	Do sunlight also powers photosynthesis and life on Earth?
the electromagnetic spectrum is the range of wavelengths of visible light	Do fortunately, gamma rays dont penetrate Earths atmosphere?
light with the most energy is infrared light	Do these forms of energy travel from the campfire to you?
gamma rays do not penetrate earths atmosphere	Do fortunately, gamma rays dont penetrate Earths atmosphere?
warmer molecules have more energy than cooler ones	Do can you explain why?
conduction happens mainly in the upper atmosphere	Do can you explain why?
warm air always sinks to the surface in a convection current	Do convection is the most important way that heat travels in the atmosphere?
the greenhouse effect causes more solar energy to reach earths surface	Do these forms of energy travel from the campfire to you?
energy cannot be created or destroyed	Do when the wood burns, the chemical energy changes to heat and light energy?
ability to do work	Do you can feel its heat and see its light?
two important greenhouse gases are carbon dioxide and water vapor	Do how do you think this affects Earths temperature?
tiny packet of energy	Do these forms of energy travel from the campfire to you?
transfer of energy by a current	Do these forms of energy travel from the campfire to you?
sunlight hits earth surface then heat travels by conduction back into the atmosphere	Do after sunlight heats the planets surface, some heat radiates back into the atmosphere?
transfer of energy by waves through air or empty space	Do after sunlight heats the planets surface, some heat radiates back into the atmosphere?
deep purple is part of the ultraviolet spectrum	Do fortunately, gamma rays dont penetrate Earths atmosphere?
burning wood releases chemical energy	Do when the wood burns, the chemical energy changes to heat and light energy?
light with wavelengths too long for humans to see	Do waves with shorter wavelengths have more energy?
transfer of energy by direct contact between molecules	Do can you explain why?
light with wavelengths too short for humans to see	Do fortunately, gamma rays dont penetrate Earths atmosphere?
layer of the atmosphere above the troposphere	Do the layer rises to about 50 kilometers (31 miles) above the surface?
layer of the atmosphere above the mesosphere	Do it acts as a boundary between the stratosphere and the mesosphere?
boundary between the troposphere and stratosphere	Do it acts as a boundary between the stratosphere and the mesosphere?
layer of the atmosphere above the thermosphere	Do earths gravity is so weak in the exosphere that gas molecules sometimes just float off into space?
boundary between the stratosphere and mesosphere	Do it acts as a boundary between the stratosphere and the mesosphere?
lowest layer of the atmosphere	Do this makes the temperature higher near the surface than at higher altitudes?
layer of the atmosphere above the stratosphere	Do the layer rises to about 50 kilometers (31 miles) above the surface?
most of the heat in the troposphere comes directly from the sun	Do this makes the temperature higher near the surface than at higher altitudes?
convection currents occur in all five layers of the atmosphere	Do refer to this figure as you read about the layers below?
most of the heat that enters the mesosphere comes from the stratosphere	Do thats why the mesosphere is warmest at the bottom?
friction with gas molecules causes meteors to burn up in the atmosphere	Do many meteors burn up completely in the mesosphere?
the troposphere rises to about 50 kilometers above earths surface	Do the layer rises to about 50 kilometers (31 miles) above the surface?
the top of the mesosphere is warmer than the bottom	Do thats why the mesosphere is warmest at the bottom?
the aurora borealis occurs because of storms on earths surface	Do in the Southern Hemisphere, they are called southern lights, or aurora australis?
the thermosphere contains charged particles called ions	Do they then become charged particles called ions?
the exosphere merges gradually with outer space	Do earths gravity is so weak in the exosphere that gas molecules sometimes just float off into space?
gas molecules in the exosphere are extremely cold	Do thats why the mesosphere is warmest at the bottom?
driest of all climates	Do they are dry because they are in continental interiors or rain shadows?
climate found at very high altitudes	Do as you read about the major climate types below, find them on the map in Figure 17.9?
climate that has short grasses and low bushes	Do 10)?
climate that has conifer forests	Do 13)?
climate type that includes marine west coast climates	Do as you read about the major climate types below, find them on the map in Figure 17.9?
climate found on the coast of california	Do as you read about the major climate types below, find them on the map in Figure 17.9?
climate type that is found in inland areas of the northern hemisphere	Do as you read about the major climate types below, find them on the map in Figure 17.9?
right around the equator is the one latitude with no glaciers	Do 10)?
a valley could have a different microclimate from a hillside because cold air sinks	Do since cold air sinks, a depression in the land can be a lot colder than the land around it?
the southern hemisphere has no lands with a continental climate	Do 13)?
coastal california has a mediterranean climate with woody plants to survive dry summers	Do pine and oak forests grow in this climate?
the sonoran desert has only a few sparse plants	Do as you read about the major climate types below, find them on the map in Figure 17.9?
each type of climate is associated with certain types of living things	Do as you read about the major climate types below, find them on the map in Figure 17.9?
all tropical climates have high rainfall year round	Do 10)?
a desert is any area that receives less than 50 cm of rainfall per year	Do 10)?
steppes are dry because they occur between 15 and 30 degrees latitude	Do they are dry because they are in continental interiors or rain shadows?
temperate climates vary in the amount and timing of precipitation they receive	Do 10)?
the southeastern united states has a mediterranean climate	Do as you read about the major climate types below, find them on the map in Figure 17.9?
subarctic climates have low precipitation especially during the winter	Do 13)?
ice caps are found in alaska canada and greenland	Do it doesnt melt because its too cold?
tundra climates occur only near the poles	Do 10)?
continental climates include humid continental and humid subtropical climates	Do 13)?
small changes in temperature can make big changes in climate	Do its been both hotter and colder than it is today?
from o ce to 2010 ce average global temperature has gone straight up	Do human beings are the main cause of recent global warming?
climate can change as continents shift position	Do its been both hotter and colder than it is today?
global warming will cause weather to be more extreme	Do they are also more extreme?
all global warming projections show temperature rising during this century	Do human beings are the main cause of recent global warming?
it takes large changes in earths climate to affect living things	Do its been both hotter and colder than it is today?
only one ice age occurred over the past billion years	Do how do scientists learn about Earths past climates?
in the pleistocene ice age earths temperature was 5 c cooler than it is today	Do humans lived during this ice age?
during the last ice age glaciers covered much of north america	Do humans lived during this ice age?
temperatures were higher during the medieval warm period than they have been over the past decade	Do how do scientists learn about Earths past climates?
plate tectonics may cause ocean currents to shift	Do these changes can affect Earths temperature?
an enormous volcanic eruption would increase earths temperature	Do its been both hotter and colder than it is today?
solar storms are the main cause of recent global warming	Do human beings are the main cause of recent global warming?
greenhouse gases block sunlight and cool the planet	Do 20 shows the increase in carbon dioxide since 1960?
the amount of carbon dioxide in the air has been increasing for many decades	Do 20 shows the increase in carbon dioxide since 1960?
dramatic increase in earths temperature since the middle of the 1800s	Do its been both hotter and colder than it is today?
shortterm climate change in which the pacific ocean is warmer than usual	Do its been both hotter and colder than it is today?
slight increase in earths temperature that occurred about 1000 years ago	Do its been both hotter and colder than it is today?
period in earths history when temperatures were cooler than normal	Do its been both hotter and colder than it is today?
movement of cold water from the bottom to the surface of the ocean	Do these changes can affect Earths temperature?
difference from average temperature	Do eight of them have occurred since 1998! This is what is usually meant by global warming?
shortterm climate change in which the pacific ocean is cooler than usual	Do its been both hotter and colder than it is today?
process in which living things obtain energy from food	Do the cycle then repeats?
carbon compound used by plants to make sugar	Do the cycle then repeats?
key element in proteins	Do you can see the nitrogen cycle in Figure 18.13?
process that releases nitrogen from organic remains	Do you can see the nitrogen cycle in Figure 18.13?
process that changes nitrogen to a form that plants can use	Do its called fixing nitrogen?
element that is the basis of all life on earth	Do you can see the nitrogen cycle in Figure 18.13?
type of carbon compound that includes sugars and starches	Do you can see the nitrogen cycle in Figure 18.13?
carbon is an important part of organic material	Do you can see the nitrogen cycle in Figure 18.13?
when an organism decomposes its carbon is released back into the environment	Do you can see the nitrogen cycle in Figure 18.13?
carbon is only found in organic material	Do you can see the nitrogen cycle in Figure 18.13?
nitrogen is a nutrient so more is always better	Do you can see the nitrogen cycle in Figure 18.13?
algae create food energy from sunlight	Do the cycle then repeats?
the carbon cycle includes both living and nonliving things	Do both cycles are shown in Figure 18.11?
carbon changes form as it moves through the carbon cycle	Do both cycles are shown in Figure 18.11?
volcanic eruptions release carbon dioxide into the air	Do for example, it may combine with nitrogen and?
the atmosphere contains more carbon than the oceans	Do much of the carbon sinks to the bottom of the oceans, where it may stay for hundreds of years?
carbon cycles very quickly through ocean water	Do you can see the nitrogen cycle in Figure 18.13?
nitrogen is one of the most important nutrients needed by plants	Do its called fixing nitrogen?
plants obtain nitrogen directly from the atmosphere	Do its called fixing nitrogen?
nitrogen in runoff that enters ponds kills algae and water plants	Do you can see it Figure 18.14?
when algae use food for energy they release oxygen into the water	Do the cycle then repeats?
there is a large dead zone in the gulf of mexico	Do you can see it Figure 18.14?
the population growth rate equals the number of births in a year per 100 people	Do what do you think might cause this to happen?
if the birth rate is less than the death rate then the population has a growth rate of zero	Do what will need to change for the population to stop growing then?
there is no limit on how large a population can grow	Do the human population started to grow much faster?
the human population started to grow rapidly in the 1800s	Do the human population started to grow much faster?
in the first phase of the demographic transition populations grew slowly	Do the human population started to grow much faster?
pesticides increase crop production by killing weed plants	Do 20 shows the growth rates of human populations all over the world?
human population growth rates are highest in the united states	Do what will need to change for the population to stop growing then?
we may run out of oil by the mid2000s	Do many dont have enough to eat or live with?
alien species can cause native species to go extinct	Do many dont have enough to eat or live with?
some people think that sustainable development may require a smaller human population	Do what will you do?
annual births minus deaths per 100 population members	Do what do you think might cause this to happen?
drug that kills bacteria	Do 20 shows the growth rates of human populations all over the world?
using resources in a way that gives everyone enough and protects the environment	Do when the population reaches the carrying capacity, it stops growing?
substance that prevents a disease	Do these changes are called the demographic transition?
largest population that can be supported by the environment	Do when the population reaches the carrying capacity, it stops growing?
change from high birth and death rates to low birth and death rates	Do 20 shows the growth rates of human populations all over the world?
increase in food production due to new products and methods	Do 20 shows the growth rates of human populations all over the world?
love canal is considered to be one of the worst environmental disasters of all time	Do the story is outlined below and illustrated in Figure 19.9?
the soil of love canal was contaminated with lead and mercury	Do the story is outlined below and illustrated in Figure 19.9?
the superfund act requires safe disposal of hazardous waste	Do even households produce a lot of hazardous waste?
all hazardous waste is corrosive and explosive	Do even households produce a lot of hazardous waste?
electronic products contain toxic chemicals	Do you know how to dispose of hazardous waste in your community?
agriculture produces very little hazardous waste	Do even households produce a lot of hazardous waste?
no hazardous wastes can be recycled safely	Do even households produce a lot of hazardous waste?
hazardous products should never be reused	Do even households produce a lot of hazardous waste?
you should never put old batteries in the trash	Do you know how to dispose of hazardous waste in your community?
most cities have centers for disposal of household hazardous waste	Do even households produce a lot of hazardous waste?
to dispose of liquid waste let it evaporate	Do even households produce a lot of hazardous waste?
batteries contain toxic materials and should be disposed of properly	Do many of these chemicals are toxic to people and other animals?
the superfund act requires companies to be responsible for hazardous chemicals that they put into the	Do even households produce a lot of hazardous waste?
pesticides in any amount are not toxic to humans	Do the law also required safer disposal of hazardous waste in the future?
toxic wastes can be located because they are always visible	Do the law also required safer disposal of hazardous waste in the future?
highly reactive with other substances	Do many of these chemicals are toxic to people and other animals?
any waste that is dangerous to people or the environment	Do even households produce a lot of hazardous waste?
able to burn easily	Do many of these chemicals are toxic to people and other animals?
act of contaminating the environment	Do 10)?
law requiring that money be set aside to clean up toxic waste sites	Do the law also required safer disposal of hazardous waste in the future?
earths magnetic north pole is always located in the same place	Do 3)?
a compass needle points toward earths true north	Do 3)?
all landforms are created by constructive forces	Do these are?
a mountain may wear away into a high flat area called a plateau	Do these are?
examples of landforms include hills straits and capes	Do we will talk about some different landforms in the next section?
the ocean basin begins where the ocean meets the land	Do at about 11 km deep, it is the deepest place on Earth! To compare, the tallest place on Earth, Mount Everest, is less than 9 km tall?
the continental shelf is the part of a continent that is under ocean water	Do at about 11 km deep, it is the deepest place on Earth! To compare, the tallest place on Earth, Mount Everest, is less than 9 km tall?
the continental rise is formed by volcanic eruptions	Do at about 11 km deep, it is the deepest place on Earth! To compare, the tallest place on Earth, Mount Everest, is less than 9 km tall?
midocean ridges form from sediments deposited by ocean water	Do at about 11 km deep, it is the deepest place on Earth! To compare, the tallest place on Earth, Mount Everest, is less than 9 km tall?
the mariana trench is the deepest place on earth	Do at about 11 km deep, it is the deepest place on Earth! To compare, the tallest place on Earth, Mount Everest, is less than 9 km tall?
latitude and longitude can describe direction	Do you will learn about this type of grid when we discuss maps later in this chapter?
elevation describes how far above sea level an object is	Do we will talk about some different landforms in the next section?
continents can be billions of years old	Do these are?
midocean ridges are the deepest places in the ocean	Do at about 11 km deep, it is the deepest place on Earth! To compare, the tallest place on Earth, Mount Everest, is less than 9 km tall?
the ocean basin begins where the ocean meets the land	Do at about 11 km deep, it is the deepest place on Earth! To compare, the tallest place on Earth, Mount Everest, is less than 9 km tall?
difference in elevation of landforms in a region	Do we will talk about some different landforms in the next section?
land mass above sea level	Do we will talk about some different landforms in the next section?
relief over a given region	Do we will talk about some different landforms in the next section?
figure on a map or nautical chart that shows north south east and west	Do 3)?
height of a land feature measured relative to sea level	Do we will talk about some different landforms in the next section?
device with a magnetic needle that is used to find the magnetic north pole	Do 3)?
physical feature on earths surface	Do you will learn about this type of grid when we discuss maps later in this chapter?
distance north or south of the equator	Do if you know your latitude, you know how far you are north or south of the equator?
map made by projecting one point on earth onto a flat surface	Do a gnomic projection is best for use over a small area?
map made by projecting earths surface onto a cylinder	Do 13)?
map made by projecting earths surface onto a cone	Do 13)?
distance east or west of the prime meridian	Do while you are jumping, your arms are going the same way as each of these grid lines: horizontal for latitude and vertical for longitude?
numbers in a grid that locate a particular point	Do 20)?
any method of representing earths curved surface in two dimensions	Do 13)?
all map projections have some disadvantage	Do this is along a line of latitude, usually the equator?
both robinson and mercator projections have distortion at the poles more than at the equator	Do this is along a line of latitude, usually the equator?
gnomonic projections are most accurate when used for small geographic areas	Do so how do you find your location on a map?
the mercator projection unlike most other maps represents the world with south at the top of the map	Do 13)?
a globe is the most detailed map we have of earth	Do if you know your latitude, you know how far you are north or south of the equator?
the top of a map generally represents north	Do 13)?
a geographic map shows types and locations of rocks in an area	Do 13)?
mercator projections are no longer used today	Do this is along a line of latitude, usually the equator?
on a mercator projection landmasses near the poles are reduced in size	Do a gnomic projection is best for use over a small area?
the poles are often mapped with gnomonic projections to avoid distortion	Do a gnomic projection is best for use over a small area?
a robinson projection is more accurate than a mercator projection	Do so how do you find your location on a map?
lines of latitude meet at the poles	Do if you know your latitude, you know how far you are north or south of the equator?
lines of longitude are all parallel to one another	Do 20)?
you can find your location on a map if you know only your latitude and longitude	Do 20)?
distances are true to scale on a globe	Do this is a link that you can follow to get there: http://w tilt your image and lots more?
on a topographic map only the contour lines that are numbered represent changes in elevation	Do this cannot happen?
two contour lines on a topographic may be parallel or they may intersect each other	Do this information also helps boaters navigate safely?
the contour interval of a topographic map represents the horizontal distance between contour lines	Do the legend on the map also gives the contour interval?
you can use a topographic map to determine the slope of the land	Do these maps are invaluable for Earth scientists?
on a bathymetric map contour lines represent the distance to the bottom of the water	Do this cannot happen?
a topographic map can be used to determine the direction that rivers and streams flow	Do these maps are invaluable for Earth scientists?
a topographic map of a mountain shows which side of the mountain is steepest	Do these maps are invaluable for Earth scientists?
if contour lines are so close together that they almost touch they represent a plain or plateau	Do this information also helps boaters navigate safely?
topographic maps are useful only to geologists and other earth scientists	Do these maps are invaluable for Earth scientists?
geologic maps use different colors to represent different types of rocks	Do they do not show the detail of individual rock layers?
the difference between two contour lines is the contour interval	Do the legend on the map also gives the contour interval?
contour lines help us to see the threedimensional shape of the land	Do these maps are invaluable for Earth scientists?
concentric lines that are very far apart show a high steep hill	Do this cannot happen?
the hatch marks on a topographic map are drawn on the side of the circle with the higher elevation	Do these maps are invaluable for Earth scientists?
while topographic maps can show vertical distances they cannot show horizontal distances	Do these maps are invaluable for Earth scientists?
feature on a topographic map represented by concentric contour lines with hatch marks	Do these maps are invaluable for Earth scientists?
map that shows water depths in a body of water	Do this information also helps boaters navigate safely?
difference in elevation between adjacent contour lines on a topographic map	Do the legend on the map also gives the contour interval?
map that shows elevations of features on earths surface	Do this information also helps boaters navigate safely?
feature on a topographic map represented by concentric contour lines without hatch marks	Do these maps are invaluable for Earth scientists?
line connecting points with the same elevation on a topographic map	Do these maps are invaluable for Earth scientists?
feature on a topographic map represented by vshaped contour lines	Do these maps are invaluable for Earth scientists?
satellites can be used to track the paths of hurricanes	Do different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet?
all satellites orbit earth from east to west	Do different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet?
communications satellites have polar orbits	Do different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet?
a polar orbit is a shorter orbit than a geostationary orbit	Do different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet?
some weather satellites have geostationary orbits	Do different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet?
gps can only be done with a minimum of 4 satellites	Do different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet?
polar orbits are closer to earth than geostationary orbits	Do different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet?
satellites in polar orbits always remain over earths north or south pole	Do different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet?
gis stands for geostationary information system	Do communications satellites, like satellite TV, use this type of orbit to keep communications going full time?
satellites identify vegetation by the color of light it reflects	Do different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet?
computers increase the accuracy of maps made from satellite images and satellite data	Do during the 21st century, computers will be used more and more in mapping?
the higher above earth that a satellite orbits the smaller the view it is able to see	Do different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet?
satellites can help you locate your precise position on earths surface	Do the?
a gps receiver detects lines of latitude and longitude	Do the?
any type of information that can be linked with locations can be used to make a map	Do during the 21st century, computers will be used more and more in mapping?
us government agency that has launched a fleet of scientific satellites	Do different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet?
type of orbit that allows a satellite to see all of earths surface in less than a day	Do different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet?
artificial body that orbits earth	Do different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet?
system of satellites used to locate exact positions on earths surface	Do the?
device that detects radio signals from satellites to determine its position on earths surface	Do the?
type of orbit that allows a satellite to stay over the same location on earths surface	Do different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet?
system that links gps information with other types of information	Do the?
drinking bottled water is better for you and the environment	Do 1 shows another example?
it is usually better to throw something away than to fix it	Do if the materials are toxic, they may cause pollution?
pollution occurs when a product is produced and when it is tossed away	Do 1 shows another example?
your community probably recycles plastics that have certain numbers on them	Do but it has plastic around the opening?
soil is considered a nonrenewable resource	Do what will happen to resource use?
renewable resources cannot be overused	Do what will happen to resource use?
both plastic and rubber are made from petroleum	Do it depends in part on how we use them?
elements that are used to produce nuclear power are renewable resources	Do it took months to plug the leak?
oil reserves beneath land are running out	Do it took months to plug the leak?
when we conserve resources we also produce less trash	Do if the materials are toxic, they may cause pollution?
we use less of fossil fuels today than we did in the 1970s	Do what will happen to resource use?
china uses more paper per person than any other country	Do its a big way you can help the planet!?
it costs more to recycle resources than to use new resources	Do what will happen to resource use?
recycling used products is the same as reusing them	Do it takes no resources at all to reuse items or not buy them in the first place?
recycled plastic water bottles can be made into tshirts	Do its a big way you can help the planet!?
example of a renewable resource	Do what will happen to resource use?
saving resources	Do what will happen to resource use?
any natural resource that will not run out if we use it wisely	Do what will happen to resource use?
anything in nature that humans need	Do it depends in part on how we use them?
buying items with reusable or recyclable packaging	Do some other ideas for reusing resources are shown in Figure 20.7?
example of a nonrenewable resource	Do what will happen to resource use?
any natural resource that will run out if we keep using it	Do what will happen to resource use?
in the us more energy is used for transportation than for any other single purpose	Do s?
nonrenewable energy resources used in the us include nuclear energy	Do we also need to use them more efficiently?
the renewable energy resource that is used most in the us is solar energy	Do s?
solar energy usually must be transported long distances to be useful	Do s?
the purpose of solar panels is to prevent sunlight from overheating a home	Do s?
most nonrenewable energy resources will last thousands of years if we conserve them	Do we also need to use them more efficiently?
collecting sunlight for solar energy requires solar energy power plants	Do s?
you can save more energy by unplugging appliances than just turning them off	Do what if millions of households used Energy Star appliances? How much energy would it save?
a car uses gasoline more efficiently if it is driven faster than 55 mihr	Do we also need to use them more efficiently?
you can save electricity by using compact fluorescent light bulbs	Do what if millions of households used Energy Star appliances? How much energy would it save?
if the cost of oil goes up sources that were too expensive to extract may become economical	Do we also need to use them more efficiently?
fuel that is refined from petroleum	Do s?
to increase energy efficiency be sure that equipment is running well	Do we also need to use them more efficiently?
energy resource that is used more than any other in the us	Do s?
conserving resources cuts down on trash	Do we also need to use them more efficiently?
plant that separates petroleum into different products	Do s?
example of a renewable energy resource	Do s?
the best energy source would be one that supplies a lot of energy and takes a lot of energy to make it	Do you ride a bus or have someone drive you to school? Motor vehicles need energy from fossil fuels to run?
individuals can only do a little to increase energy efficiency because most energy is used by industry	Do s?
largest single use of energy in the us	Do we also need to use them more efficiently?
all forms of life need water to survive	Do municipal use refers to water used by homes and businesses in communities?
we can live longer without water than we can without food	Do municipal use refers to water used by homes and businesses in communities?
irrigation may add unwanted chemicals to groundwater	Do the soil may get too salty for plants to grow?
large irrigation systems may waste a lot of water	Do it evaporates or runs off the ground?
water can be used to generate electricity	Do an important way that industries use water is to cool machines and power plants?
water scarcity is not a problem since 70 of earth is covered by water	Do more than 70 percent of Earths surface is covered by water?
more than 70 percent of earths surface is covered with water	Do more than 70 percent of Earths surface is covered by water?
glaciers are a source of fresh water in some locations	Do 5)?
most people in the world have enough clean fresh water	Do more than 70 percent of Earths surface is covered by water?
most of the fresh water on earth is under the ground	Do more than 70 percent of Earths surface is covered by water?
by the year 2025 only onequarter of the worlds people will have enough clean water	Do more than 70 percent of Earths surface is covered by water?
in poorer countries many young children die from waterborne diseases	Do these people must carry water home in a bucket from a distant pump?
drier climates generally have less water for people to use	Do svg?
because of conservation we use less water today than we did a century ago	Do municipal use refers to water used by homes and businesses in communities?
water is safe to drink as long as it is moving water	Do diseases from unsafe drinking water are the leading cause of death in young children?
worlds most serious resource problem	Do more than 70 percent of Earths surface is covered by water?
period of unusually low rainfall	Do 7 shows the global water situation in the 2030s with water stress and water scarcity on the map?
degree to which water is polluted	Do diseases from unsafe drinking water are the leading cause of death in young children?
any method of providing extra water to plants	Do an important way that industries use water is to cool machines and power plants?
underground pipe that collects runoff water	Do the runoff water may end up in storm sewers that flow into a body of water, such as the ocean?
greatest use of water worldwide	Do municipal use refers to water used by homes and businesses in communities?
point source pollution is harder to control	Do municipal, or community, sources?
agricultural pollution can contaminate well water	Do municipal, or community, sources?
livestock waste is always stored safely in lagoons	Do the contaminated water killed?
industrial water pollution commonly includes toxic chemicals such as mercury	Do municipal, or community, sources?
no harm is done if lawn chemicals are washed into storm sewers	Do sometimes the wastewater is not treated enough and contains bacteria or toxic chemicals?
water pollution contributes to water shortages	Do municipal, or community, sources?
most ocean pollution comes from ships at sea	Do ocean water is becoming seriously polluted?
most of the pollution in the oceans is carried there by rivers and runoff	Do ocean water is becoming seriously polluted?
animal waste and fertilizers bring nutrients to nearby water sources	Do municipal, or community, sources?
oil leaks and spills occur only in the oceans	Do ocean water is becoming seriously polluted?
thermal pollution kills fish by making the water too cold	Do municipal, or community, sources?
water pollution includes any contaminant that gets into lakes streams and oceans	Do ocean water is becoming seriously polluted?
factory farms with thousands of animals pollute ocean water with animal wastes	Do ocean water is becoming seriously polluted?
in some places people dump trash and raw sewage into the ocean	Do the polluted water may also kill fish and other ocean life?
if polluted water infiltrates the ground it is no longer a problem	Do ocean water is becoming seriously polluted?
major cause of water pollution	Do municipal, or community, sources?
pollution that enters water in many places	Do municipal, or community, sources?
pollution that raises the temperature of water	Do municipal, or community, sources?
where ocean pollution is worst	Do ocean water is becoming seriously polluted?
pollution that enters water in just one place	Do municipal, or community, sources?
area in a body of water where nothing can live	Do which type of pollution do you think is harder to control?
a burning river helped people realize the need to protect water	Do these consequences have led industries, agriculture, and communities to pollute the water much less than before?
water pollution has been reduced by laws fining polluters	Do these consequences have led industries, agriculture, and communities to pollute the water much less than before?
most water pollution is caused by recreation on the water	Do these consequences have led industries, agriculture, and communities to pollute the water much less than before?
coagulation is used during water treatment to remove chemicals from water	Do finally, the water is pure enough to drink?
filters are used during water treatment to remove bacteria from water	Do finally, the water is pure enough to drink?
people in wealthy nations waste more water than people in poor nations	Do of course, this mostly applies to people in the wealthy nations that have the most water and also waste the most?
the single biggest use of water is for industry	Do very little of the water evaporates or runs off the ground?
watersaving toilets use only about half as much water as regular toilets	Do it shows that you dont have to sacrifice beauty to save water?
when communities ration water they ban its use by certain households	Do follow any bans where you live?
chemicals are added to untreated water to cause solids to clump together	Do finally, the water is pure enough to drink?
cleaning the ocean of pollutants is difficult because the ocean is so vast	Do you can see the Cuyahoga River in Figure 21.16?
it is easier to clean water that has become polluted than to keep it from becoming polluted	Do you can see the Cuyahoga River in Figure 21.16?
water for drinking medicine agriculture and water parks is all purified to the same quality	Do finally, the water is pure enough to drink?
wastewater contains hundreds of contaminants	Do you can see the Cuyahoga River in Figure 21.16?
in a wastewater treatment plant water is treated in one single process	Do very little of the water evaporates or runs off the ground?
process in water treatment in which small particles are separated from water	Do finally, the water is pure enough to drink?
process in water treatment in which large particles settle to the bottom of the water	Do finally, the water is pure enough to drink?
series of processes to improve the quality of water	Do finally, the water is pure enough to drink?
process in water treatment in which chlorine is added to water	Do finally, the water is pure enough to drink?
preserving a resource by using less of it	Do you can see the Cuyahoga River in Figure 21.16?
contamination with chemicals waste or other harmful substances	Do of course, this mostly applies to people in the wealthy nations that have the most water and also waste the most?
process in water treatment in which solids in water clump together	Do finally, the water is pure enough to drink?
type of pollutant that forms when other pollutants undergo chemical reactions	Do they are known as primary pollutants and secondary pollutants?
primary pollutant that is a carbon compound such as methane	Do they are known as primary pollutants and secondary pollutants?
type of pollutant that enters the air directly	Do smog ozone is harmful to humans and other living things?
solid particle in the air	Do 1)?
measure of the pollutants in air	Do they are known as primary pollutants and secondary pollutants?
brown haze that forms in air when certain pollutants react together in sunlight	Do they are known as primary pollutants and secondary pollutants?
primary component of photochemical smog	Do they are known as primary pollutants and secondary pollutants?
before the industrial revolution there was very little air pollution that wasnt natural	Do cars and trucks burn gasoline, which adds greatly to air pollution?
burning fossil fuels releases carbon dioxide into the atmosphere	Do others evaporate into the air?
about 150 million tons of pollutants enter into the atmosphere every year	Do others evaporate into the air?
the clean air act regulates carbon dioxide	Do the single biggest cause is fossil fuel burning?
ozone in the lower atmosphere protects life from uv radiation	Do smog ozone is harmful to humans and other living things?
air pollution is caused completely by human actions	Do these reactions produced many more harmful compounds?
the air in the us is more polluted now than it was 50 years ago	Do vehicles, factories, and power plants still release more than 150 million tons of pollutants into the air each year?
livestock wastes pollute the air with methane	Do methane is a VOC that evaporates from livestock waste and landfills?
animal wastes add particulates to the atmosphere	Do the single biggest cause is fossil fuel burning?
particulates include only particles big enough to be seen by the unaided eye	Do 1)?
ozone forms when certain air pollutants are heated by direct sunlight	Do they are known as primary pollutants and secondary pollutants?
paints and petroleum products release volatile organic compounds	Do methane is a VOC that evaporates from livestock waste and landfills?
air pollution contributes to global warming	Do vehicles, factories, and power plants still release more than 150 million tons of pollutants into the air each year?
in california mountain ranges can trap polluted air over cities	Do these reactions produced many more harmful compounds?
all primary pollutants come from directly from motor vehicles and smokestacks	Do they are known as primary pollutants and secondary pollutants?
type of pollutant that is usually higher in indoor than outdoor air	Do the type of damage depends on the pollutant?
buildup of heavy metals in the tissues of organisms	Do thats because their organs are still developing?
harmful radiation blocked by the ozone layer	Do thats why people were alarmed in the 1980s to learn that there was a hole in the ozone layer?
gas in smog that is harmful to plants and people	Do the type of damage depends on the pollutant?
type of air pollutant that destroys the ozone layer	Do the type of damage depends on the pollutant?
type of air pollutant that blocks sunlight from reaching earths surface	Do the type of damage depends on the pollutant?
odorless colorless gas that is deadly to people in a confined space	Do you can see one in Figure 22.7?
lung cancer rates are increasing entirely due to more people smoking	Do this may affect entire ecosystems?
ozone loss near the north and south poles is about the same	Do thats why people were alarmed in the 1980s to learn that there was a hole in the ozone layer?
on a ph scale numbers below 7 are basic	Do nitrogen and sulfur oxides form acid rain, which is described below?
particulates reduce the amount of sunshine that reaches the ground	Do thats why people were alarmed in the 1980s to learn that there was a hole in the ozone layer?
acid rain is produced by nitrogen and sulfuroxides in the atmosphere	Do nitrogen and sulfur oxides form acid rain, which is described below?
breathing polluted air increases the risk of lung cancer	Do this affects whole ecosystems?
ozone in smog can kill entire forests	Do these people include those with lung or heart problems?
some people are more sensitive to smog than others	Do these people include those with lung or heart problems?
small fish are likely to contain higher levels of lead than large fish	Do thats because their organs are still developing?
exposure to heavy metals can cause brain damage in unborn babies	Do how might you reduce your exposure to VOCs?
acid rain contains higherthannormal levels of carbonic acid	Do this forms carbonic acid, a weak acid?
acid rain damages structures but does not harm living things	Do nitrogen and sulfur oxides form acid rain, which is described below?
the hole in the ozone layer shows that air quality is improving	Do thats why people were alarmed in the 1980s to learn that there was a hole in the ozone layer?
the ozone hole is bigger in some seasons than in others	Do thats why people were alarmed in the 1980s to learn that there was a hole in the ozone layer?
groundlevel ozone is especially harmful to people with heart disease	Do the type of damage depends on the pollutant?
since the passage of the clean air act emissions of the six major pollutants have decreased by 50	Do when they were discovered, worldwide efforts were made to reduce CFCs and carbon dioxide emissions?
removing particles from emissions is a difficult process	Do when they were discovered, worldwide efforts were made to reduce CFCs and carbon dioxide emissions?
destruction by ozone creates the ozone hole	Do since then, it has been somewhat smaller?
efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions have been successful	Do when they were discovered, worldwide efforts were made to reduce CFCs and carbon dioxide emissions?
without the montreal protocol skin cancer cases in the us would have been higher	Do since then, it has been somewhat smaller?
the clean air act was passed in order to reduce global warming	Do when they were discovered, worldwide efforts were made to reduce CFCs and carbon dioxide emissions?
because of the clean air act air pollution has been eliminated completely	Do when fossil fuels must be used, prevent the pollution from entering the air?
pollution by ozone was reduced at least 50 percent by the montreal protocol	Do since then, it has been somewhat smaller?
hydrogen cars produce about 10 percent of the air pollution of gasburning cars	Do 14)?
some scrubbers use steam to remove pollutants from exhaust	Do for example, they change nitrogen oxides to harmless nitrogen and oxygen gasses?
the kyoto protocol has been more successful than the montreal protocol	Do since then, it has been somewhat smaller?
the size of the hole in the ozone layer has gotten somewhat smaller since 2006	Do since then, it has been somewhat smaller?
capandtrade systems were developed to reduce the use of cfcs	Do when they were discovered, worldwide efforts were made to reduce CFCs and carbon dioxide emissions?
carbon is sequestered naturally by forests	Do when they were discovered, worldwide efforts were made to reduce CFCs and carbon dioxide emissions?
the worlds greatest producer of greenhouse gases is the us	Do of the nations that signed it, few are?
worldwide agreement on air pollution that focuses on cfcs	Do since then, it has been somewhat smaller?
device that changes pollutants in exhaust gases to nontoxic compounds	Do for example, they change nitrogen oxides to harmless nitrogen and oxygen gasses?
worldwide agreement on air pollution that focuses on greenhouse gases	Do since then, it has been somewhat smaller?
device that filters pollutants from exhaust gases	Do for example, they change nitrogen oxides to harmless nitrogen and oxygen gasses?
us law that regulates six major air pollutants	Do for example, they change nitrogen oxides to harmless nitrogen and oxygen gasses?
removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and storing it in another form	Do when they were discovered, worldwide efforts were made to reduce CFCs and carbon dioxide emissions?
system of limits and allowances on carbon dioxide emissions that can be exchanged between nations	Do when they were discovered, worldwide efforts were made to reduce CFCs and carbon dioxide emissions?
light travels as vibrating electric and magnetic fields	Do this means that as wavelengths get shorter, more waves move past a particular spot in the same amount of time?
all telescopes work by gathering and focusing visible light	Do astronomers use the light that comes to us to gather information about the universe?
visible light includes all the colors of the rainbow	Do to learn more about stars spectra, visit?
the only radiation emitted by the sun is visible light	Do to learn more about stars spectra, visit?
the light from distant stars is very old by the time it reaches earth	Do n?
the largest optical telescopes today are refracting telescopes	Do html?
radio telescopes look like satellite dishes	Do to learn more about radio telescopes and radio astronomy in general, go to?
the hubble telescope is the only space telescope ever placed in orbit	Do to learn more about NASAs great observatories, check out?
galileo observed that venus has phases like the moon	Do but Galileos observations through his telescope proved that Copernicus was right?
galileos observations supported the theory that planets revolve around the sun	Do but Galileos observations through his telescope proved that Copernicus was right?
a light year is a measure of time	Do thats over a hundred-billion-trillion kilometers!?
type of electromagnetic wave with the highest frequency	Do this means that as wavelengths get shorter, more waves move past a particular spot in the same amount of time?
the most distant objects are viewed with radio waves	Do to learn more about stars spectra, visit?
number of waves that pass a given point per second	Do this means that as wavelengths get shorter, more waves move past a particular spot in the same amount of time?
type of electromagnetic wave with the longest wavelength	Do this means that as wavelengths get shorter, more waves move past a particular spot in the same amount of time?
radio telescopes can be linked together to gather more data on a space object	Do to learn more about radio telescopes and radio astronomy in general, go to?
horizontal distance between the same points on adjacent waves	Do this means that as wavelengths get shorter, more waves move past a particular spot in the same amount of time?
the longer the wavelength the higher the frequency	Do this means that as wavelengths get shorter, more waves move past a particular spot in the same amount of time?
space telescopes are able to gather more types of waves than landbased telescopes	Do astronomers use the light that comes to us to gather information about the universe?
device that collects and focuses radio waves from space	Do to learn more about radio telescopes and radio astronomy in general, go to?
device that gathers and magnifies visible light from space	Do astronomers use the light that comes to us to gather information about the universe?
unit for measuring the vast distances of space	Do thats over a hundred-billion-trillion kilometers!?
humans first reached space at the beginning of the 20th century	Do early rockets were also used to launch fireworks?
rockets were developed before scientists knew how they worked	Do they all get into space using some sort of rocket?
the invention of gunpowder allowed rockets to travel to space	Do they all get into space using some sort of rocket?
only two nations have put a human on the moon the us and china	Do they all get into space using some sort of rocket?
the first use of rockets in space was to land astronauts on the moon	Do they all get into space using some sort of rocket?
a satellite is an object that orbits a smaller object	Do they all get into space using some sort of rocket?
most satellites launch themselves into orbit	Do they all get into space using some sort of rocket?
thousands of satellites are in orbit around earth	Do communications satellites are often placed in these orbits?
it was only 12 years between when the first artificial satellite was launched and neil armstrong walked	Do they all get into space using some sort of rocket?
landsat satellites make detailed images of continents and coasts	Do different satellites monitor different wavelengths of energy, as in Figure 23.19?
an object can go into orbit because of the law of conservation of momentum	Do they all get into space using some sort of rocket?
newtons third law of motion helps explain how a rocket will travel in space	Do the force pushing the rocket is called thrust?
imaging satellites are placed in high orbits over earth	Do communications satellites are often placed in these orbits?
alan shepherd was the first astronaut to walk on the moon	Do and on it went?
the us has landed space probes on mars	Do we hope to maintain contact with the two Voyager probes until at least 2020?
circular or elliptical path around an object	Do they all get into space using some sort of rocket?
force that pushes a rocket	Do the force pushing the rocket is called thrust?
object that orbits a larger object	Do they all get into space using some sort of rocket?
largest artificial satellite	Do they all get into space using some sort of rocket?
us agency in charge of space exploration	Do they all get into space using some sort of rocket?
vehicle pushed in one direction by particles flying out of it in the opposite direction	Do early rockets were also used to launch fireworks?
spacecraft that explores space without people aboard	Do we hope to maintain contact with the two Voyager probes until at least 2020?
space station that is a joint project of many nations	Do people can live on this craft for a long period of time?
any large satellite that people can live on	Do people can live on this craft for a long period of time?
part of a space shuttle that has wings	Do 28,?
one purpose of the international space station is to conduct medical research	Do people can live on this craft for a long period of time?
space station with the longest continuous use	Do people can live on this craft for a long period of time?
private companies are increasingly getting into space exploration	Do private aerospace companies will play more of a role in the coming years?
reusable space vehicle for carrying equipment and people to and from space	Do people can live on this craft for a long period of time?
first us space station	Do people can live on this craft for a long period of time?
there are currently rovers on venus and mars	Do several spacecraft are currently in orbit, studying the Martian surface and thin atmosphere?
first space telescope	Do 28,?
the mission of nasa is to study everything in the solar system except earth	Do private aerospace companies will play more of a role in the coming years?
the record for one crew inhabiting a space station is ten years	Do people can live on this craft for a long period of time?
the huygens space mission is studying pluto	Do 28,?
the soviet salyut space stations were all temporary stations	Do people can live on this craft for a long period of time?
skylab studied the effects of staying in space for long periods of time	Do people can live on this craft for a long period of time?
a space shuttle includes an orbiter fuel tank and booster rockets	Do 28,?
the space shuttle program flew a total of 10 missions	Do people can live on this craft for a long period of time?
the last space shuttle was retired in 2001	Do 28,?
space shuttle disasters caused nasa to focus on missions without crews	Do these missions still provide a great deal of valuable information?
saturns moon titan has some of the conditions needed to support life	Do people can live on this craft for a long period of time?
the stardust mission collected dust particles from the surface of mars	Do several spacecraft are currently in orbit, studying the Martian surface and thin atmosphere?
private companies will play more of role in future space missions	Do private aerospace companies will play more of a role in the coming years?
earth is the only planet in the solar system known to have liquid water	Do as Earth turns, the Moon and stars change position in the sky?
all objects in the solar system have gravitational attraction to each other	Do as the distance between the objects increases, the force of attraction decreases?
if you look at earth from the north pole the planet spins in a clockwise direction	Do as Earth turns, the Moon and stars change position in the sky?
earth is divided into four hemispheres	Do day and night, seasons, and the tides are caused by Earths motions?
the moon appears to rise in the east because earth rotates from east to west	Do as Earth turns, the Moon and stars change position in the sky?
leap year is needed because earth takes more than 365 days to orbit the sun	Do thats not true! The seasons are due to the tilt of Earths axis, as discussed above?
earth tilts about 3 degrees on its axis	Do day and night, seasons, and the tides are caused by Earths motions?
winter begins in the southern hemisphere on june 21	Do when it is winter in the Northern hemisphere, it is summer in the Southern hemisphere, and vice versa?
earth gets more gravitational pull from the sun than the moon because it is larger	Do as the distance between the objects increases, the force of attraction decreases?
the longest day in the northern hemisphere occurs on june 21	Do when it is winter in the Northern hemisphere, it is summer in the Southern hemisphere, and vice versa?
the planets move in fixed paths around the sun	Do day and night, seasons, and the tides are caused by Earths motions?
the earths mostly iron crust produces the magnetic field	Do 8)?
to make one complete rotation takes earth 36524 days	Do day and night, seasons, and the tides are caused by Earths motions?
planets closer to the sun that earth have shorter years	Do day and night, seasons, and the tides are caused by Earths motions?
the hemisphere that receives less direct rays of sunlight is cooler	Do when it is winter in the Northern hemisphere, it is summer in the Southern hemisphere, and vice versa?
all of the water on earth	Do day and night, seasons, and the tides are caused by Earths motions?
half of a sphere	Do therefore, Earths surface is constantly undergoing change?
spinning motion around an axis	Do day and night, seasons, and the tides are caused by Earths motions?
all of the living organisms on earth	Do day and night, seasons, and the tides are caused by Earths motions?
imaginary line passing through the poles of a planet	Do day and night, seasons, and the tides are caused by Earths motions?
all of the solid rock of earth	Do day and night, seasons, and the tides are caused by Earths motions?
movement in an orbit around a larger body	Do thats not true! The seasons are due to the tilt of Earths axis, as discussed above?
a total of six spaceships have landed on the moon	Do the lowest temperatures measured are as low as -233C (-397F)?
there are no current plans for returning to the moon	Do only a falling meteorite could destroy them?
the moons gravity is about half as strong as earths gravity	Do the lowest temperatures measured are as low as -233C (-397F)?
it takes the moon the same amount of time to make one rotation as it does to make one revolution	Do so it comes as no surprise that there has not been evidence of life on the Moon?
the far side of the moon has been seen only from spacecraft	Do we learned this both from the rock samples gathered by astronauts and from spacecraft sent to the Moon?
most lunar maria are on the far side of the moon	Do these temperatures are amongst the coldest in our entire solar system?
natural processes continually alter the moons surface	Do only a falling meteorite could destroy them?
lunar highlands are made of lightcolored rocks	Do these temperatures are amongst the coldest in our entire solar system?
there are rivers but no lakes on the moon	Do so it comes as no surprise that there has not been evidence of life on the Moon?
astronauts brought moon rocks back to earth	Do only a falling meteorite could destroy them?
the moon is earths only natural satellite	Do only a falling meteorite could destroy them?
most of the maria are on the moons near side	Do the rock looks light because it reflects more of the Suns light?
the lunar crust is thicker on the far side than on the near side	Do we learned this both from the rock samples gathered by astronauts and from spacecraft sent to the Moon?
the moon rotates on its axis once for every orbit it makes around the sun	Do the lowest temperatures measured are as low as -233C (-397F)?
you would weigh six times as much on the moon as on earth	Do the lowest temperatures measured are as low as -233C (-397F)?
surface features of a moon or planet	Do these temperatures are amongst the coldest in our entire solar system?
highlands on the moon	Do the rock looks light because it reflects more of the Suns light?
cause of lunar craters	Do these temperatures are amongst the coldest in our entire solar system?
related to the moon	Do only a falling meteorite could destroy them?
flat areas of lava on the moons surface	Do the rock looks light because it reflects more of the Suns light?
bowlshaped basin on the moons surface	Do these temperatures are amongst the coldest in our entire solar system?
cause of lunar maria	Do these temperatures are amongst the coldest in our entire solar system?
the sun makes up over 99 percent of the mass of the solar system	Do the three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere?
the suns core is made of solid rock	Do energy from the Suns core powers most of the solar system?
the sun has no atmosphere	Do the three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere?
the suns core is molten metal	Do energy from the Suns core powers most of the solar system?
the suns energy comes from reactions in which hydrogen changes to helium	Do energy from the Suns core powers most of the solar system?
a solar flare can knock out power grids on earth	Do they have knocked out entire power grids and can disturb radio, satellite, and cell phone communications?
energy travels through the radiative zone of the sun at the speed of light	Do the three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere?
the part of the sun that we see shining is the convective zone	Do the three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere?
the sun makes up 998 of the mass of the solar system	Do the three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere?
the corona is the coolest layer of the sun	Do the three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere?
the sun does not have a defined outer boundary	Do the three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere?
plasma is a solid	Do the inner three layers make up what we would actually call the Sun?
sunspots occur because of magnetic activity of the sun	Do the three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere?
solar wind is dangerous to spacecraft and astronauts	Do they have knocked out entire power grids and can disturb radio, satellite, and cell phone communications?
solar prominences are mountains on the suns surface	Do the material then receives more heat from the radiative zone?
relatively cool dark area on the suns surface	Do the material then receives more heat from the radiative zone?
superheated gas with an electrical charge	Do the inner three layers make up what we would actually call the Sun?
layer of the sun that surrounds the radiative zone	Do the three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere?
visible layer of the suns atmosphere	Do the three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere?
layer of the suns atmosphere that glows red	Do the three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere?
layer of the sun nearest the core	Do the three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere?
hottest layer of the suns atmosphere	Do the three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere?
phase of the moon in which half of the side facing earth is lit	Do 5 days?
phase of the moon in which the entire side facing earth is dark	Do 5 days?
event in which earth casts a shadow on the moon	Do the Moon glows with a dull red coloring during a total lunar eclipse?
inner part of the moons shadow during an eclipse	Do the Moon glows with a dull red coloring during a total lunar eclipse?
event in which the moon casts a shadow on earth	Do the Moon glows with a dull red coloring during a total lunar eclipse?
outer part of the moons shadow during an eclipse	Do the Moon glows with a dull red coloring during a total lunar eclipse?
phase of the moon in which the entire side facing earth is lit	Do 5 days?
a lunar eclipse generally lasts between 510 minutes	Do the Moon glows with a dull red coloring during a total lunar eclipse?
birds may become confused during a solar eclipse and think that it is nighttime	Do html?
during a total lunar eclipse the moon is entirely dark	Do the Moon glows with a dull red coloring during a total lunar eclipse?
a solar eclipse is seen on all of the earth that is having daytime	Do html?
the time between two full moon phases is 295 days	Do 5 days?
the coneshaped part of the moons shadow is the penumbra	Do the Moon glows with a dull red coloring during a total lunar eclipse?
light is only partly blocked in the umbra part of a shadow	Do the Moon glows with a dull red coloring during a total lunar eclipse?
solar eclipses are rare events	Do html?
during a partial lunar eclipse only part of the moon enters earths umbra	Do the Moon glows with a dull red coloring during a total lunar eclipse?
a total lunar eclipse occurs once every month	Do the Moon glows with a dull red coloring during a total lunar eclipse?
the full moon phase occurs when the moon is on the opposite side of earth from the sun	Do 5 days?
a crescent phase follows the first quarter phase of the moon	Do 5 days?
if the new moon occurs on the 1st of the month the full moon will occur on the 28th of the month	Do the Moon glows with a dull red coloring during a total lunar eclipse?
when a lunar eclipse occurs the sun cannot be seen from earth	Do 5 days?
when a solar eclipse occurs the moon cannot be seen from earth	Do 5 days?
collection of many small objects beyond the orbit of neptune	Do these two features are clues to how the solar system formed?
distance from earth to the sun	Do it wasnt until Galileo developed his telescope that people would take the Copernican?
star and the planets that orbit it	Do these two features are clues to how the solar system formed?
collection of many small objects between the orbits of mars and jupiter	Do the names for the planets Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn came from the names of gods and a goddess?
planet that orbits a star other than the sun	Do another sign is the partial dimming of a stars light as the planet passes in front of it?
planet such as pluto	Do there are many other reasons why Pluto does not fit with the other planets in our solar system?
giant cloud of gas and dust	Do 6 billion years ago?
if you know a planets orbit you can determine its approximate distance from the sun	Do these two features are clues to how the solar system formed?
the planets in order from the sun are mars venus earth mercury saturn uranus jupiter and neptune	Do 2 Earths mass?
the orbits of the planets are circular	Do gravity also holds moons in orbit around planets?
one astronomical unit is the distance from earth to sun	Do it wasnt until Galileo developed his telescope that people would take the Copernican?
all of the planets in the solar system rotate in the same direction	Do these two features are clues to how the solar system formed?
the planets in our solar system were named for greek gods and goddesses	Do the names for the planets Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn came from the names of gods and a goddess?
we now know that the sun is the center of the universe	Do it wasnt until Galileo developed his telescope that people would take the Copernican?
scientists think that our solar system formed from an asteroid belt	Do these two features are clues to how the solar system formed?
the planets formed when pieces of matter collided and clumped together	Do these two features are clues to how the solar system formed?
our solar system contains five dwarf planets	Do these two features are clues to how the solar system formed?
the planet closest to the sun is venus	Do the names for the planets Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn came from the names of gods and a goddess?
the planet with the greatest mass and diameter is saturn	Do 2 Earths mass?
planets farther from the sun have orbits that are farther apart	Do these two features are clues to how the solar system formed?
the orbits of the planets are nearly circular	Do these two features are clues to how the solar system formed?
our sun is the only star that has planets revolving around it	Do these two features are clues to how the solar system formed?
hottest of all the planets in the solar system	Do mars has only a very thin atmosphere, made up mostly of carbon dioxide?
rover that explored mars surface	Do if there was liquid water on Mars, life might have existed there in the past?
only planet in the solar system known to have plate tectonics	Do earth is the only planet that we know has plate tectonics?
any of the four planets closest to the sun	Do what are main features of Earth?
smallest of all the planets in the solar system	Do mars has only a very thin atmosphere, made up mostly of carbon dioxide?
spacecraft that is orbiting and studying mercury	Do therefore, each day on Mercury is 58 Earth days long?
planet with the largest volcano in the solar system	Do what are main features of Earth?
all of the inner planets were once geologically active	Do mercurys highly cratered surface is evidence that Mercury is not geologically active?
venus has the largest greenhouse effect of the inner planets	Do venus is most like Earth in size?
venus is the only inner planet with a large moon besides earth	Do what are main features of Earth?
besides earth the inner planets are all solid	Do what are main features of Earth?
the inner planets spin faster than the outer planets	Do mars has only a very thin atmosphere, made up mostly of carbon dioxide?
none of the inner planets of the solar system has rings	Do mars has only a very thin atmosphere, made up mostly of carbon dioxide?
compared with the outer planets the inner planets spin more quickly	Do mars has only a very thin atmosphere, made up mostly of carbon dioxide?
all of the inner planets are made of cooled igneous rock	Do mars has only a very thin atmosphere, made up mostly of carbon dioxide?
each year on mercury lasts just 58 earth days	Do therefore, each day on Mercury is 58 Earth days long?
most of mercury is extremely wet	Do therefore, each day on Mercury is 58 Earth days long?
clouds on venus contain sulfur	Do venus is most like Earth in size?
a day on venus is longer than a year on venus	Do venus is most like Earth in size?
life could evolve on earth because its atmosphere contained oxygen	Do what are main features of Earth?
some features on mars surface look as though they were eroded by water	Do if there was liquid water on Mars, life might have existed there in the past?
mars moons were meteorites that were captured by martian gravity	Do the moons were probably asteroids that were captured by Martian gravity?
saturn is the only planet with rings	Do look for Pluto in the next lesson, in the discussion of dwarf planets?
jupiter may have a small rocky core	Do jupiter may have a small rocky core at its center?
jupiter has fewer than 30 moons	Do 23)?
jupiters moon europa has some conditions suitable for life	Do these lakes contain liquid methane and ethane instead of water! Methane and ethane are compounds found in natural gas?
thunderstorms have been observed on uranus	Do this collision probably took place billions of years ago?
saturns rings were first observed by the hubble space telescope	Do the satellite was captured by Neptunes gravity as it passed by?
uranus is tilted sideways because of the pull of neptunes gravity	Do this collision probably took place billions of years ago?
neptune is so far from earth that it can be seen only with a telescope	Do neptune has slightly more mass than Uranus, but it is slightly smaller in size?
scientists think that neptunes moon triton was once part of neptune	Do the satellite was captured by Neptunes gravity as it passed by?
largest planet in the solar system	Do look for Pluto in the next lesson, in the discussion of dwarf planets?
it takes jupiter 5 earth years to make one orbit around the sun	Do it takes Jupiter about 12 Earth years to orbit once around the Sun?
only planet that is tilted on its side	Do this collision probably took place billions of years ago?
most moons in the solar system are captured asteroids	Do the satellite was captured by Neptunes gravity as it passed by?
planet with stronger winds than any other planet in the solar system	Do look for Pluto in the next lesson, in the discussion of dwarf planets?
jupiters four largest moons are larger than the dwarf planet pluto	Do look for Pluto in the next lesson, in the discussion of dwarf planets?
gap in the clouds on neptune	Do no one is sure why the clouds form this pattern?
circular cloud of dust and other small particles that orbit an outer planet	Do look for Pluto in the next lesson, in the discussion of dwarf planets?
astronauts have tested samples from europa for signs extraterrestrial life	Do photos from the Voyager missions?
saturn is unique because it is the only planet with rings	Do look for Pluto in the next lesson, in the discussion of dwarf planets?
least dense planet in the solar system	Do it takes Jupiter about 12 Earth years to orbit once around the Sun?
enormous storm on jupiter	Do no one knows for sure?
most asteroids in the solar system are located between mars and earth	Do jupiters gravity kept them apart?
asteroids formed after the rest of the solar system formed	Do jupiters gravity kept them apart?
small asteroids sometimes collide with earth	Do they hope to predict a possible collision early so they can to try to stop it?
all shooting stars become meteorites	Do the light you see comes from a small piece of matter burning up as it flies through Earths atmosphere?
after a meteor hits earths surface it is called a meteorite	Do the light you see comes from a small piece of matter burning up as it flies through Earths atmosphere?
comet orbits are similar in shape to planet orbits	Do jupiters gravity kept them apart?
meteoroids are usually larger than asteroids	Do during a meteor shower, there are many more meteors than normal for a night or two?
comets are commonly called shooting stars	Do the light you see comes from a small piece of matter burning up as it flies through Earths atmosphere?
the longest period comets come from the kuiper belt	Do other substances could also have come from comets?
a comet has an atmosphere only when it gets close to the sun	Do who will look up at it?
any object whose orbit crosses earths can collide with earth	Do they hope to predict a possible collision early so they can to try to stop it?
halleys comet is it expected to return in 2061	Do who will look up at it?
scientists think that comets may have brought water to early earth	Do other substances could also have come from comets?
the dwarf planet ceres was originally considered to be the largest asteroid	Do ceres is now considered a dwarf planet along with Pluto?
pluto is always farther from the sun than neptune is	Do we still have a lot to discover and explore!?
event that occurs when earth passes through the tail of a comet	Do during a meteor shower, there are many more meteors than normal for a night or two?
atmosphere of a comet	Do during a meteor shower, there are many more meteors than normal for a night or two?
small irregularly shaped rocky body that orbits the sun	Do 31 shows a typical asteroid?
region from which many comets come	Do other substances could also have come from comets?
region where most asteroids are located	Do jupiters gravity kept them apart?
small chunk of space rock that burns up as it falls through earths atmosphere	Do the light you see comes from a small piece of matter burning up as it flies through Earths atmosphere?
small icy object that orbits the sun	Do ceres is now considered a dwarf planet along with Pluto?
the hottest stars bluewhite the coolest stars are red	Do the color relates to a stars temperature and often its size?
stars in a constellation are near each other in space	Do the color relates to a stars temperature and often its size?
our sun is about half way through its life span	Do how do stars generate so much energy?
a black hole emits dark electromagnetic radiation that we cannot see	Do it is the tremendously dense core of a supermassive star?
the same constellations appear in a location all yearround	Do in the summer, its only up in the early morning?
constellations appear from earth to move with the seasons	Do in the summer, its only up in the early morning?
our sun is the biggest and brightest star in the galaxy	Do how do stars generate so much energy?
stars are made mostly of hydrogen and helium	Do the color relates to a stars temperature and often its size?
the coolest stars are red in color	Do the color relates to a stars temperature and often its size?
once a star forms it never changes	Do this creates an unusual quadruple star system?
gravity causes a nebula to become denser at the center	Do the ball of gas has become a star!?
a larger star remains on the main sequence longer than a smaller star	Do a very small star may be on the main sequence for tens to hundreds of billions of years?
the next stage our sun will go through is white dwarf	Do eventually, a white dwarf cools down and its light fades out?
betelgeuse is an example of a red supergiant	Do a supernova can shine as brightly as an entire galaxy, but only for a short time, as shown in Figure 26.3?
a black hole is an empty place in space	Do they then figure out the stars distance from Earth by measuring how much less bright it is than expected?
giant ball of glowing gas that is very hot	Do the ball of gas has become a star!?
stage of a stars life in which hydrogen atoms fuse to form helium	Do a very small star may be on the main sequence for tens to hundreds of billions of years?
stage of a stars life in which helium atoms fuse to form heavier elements	Do a very small star may be on the main sequence for tens to hundreds of billions of years?
explosion of a red supergiant star	Do a supernova can shine as brightly as an entire galaxy, but only for a short time, as shown in Figure 26.3?
core of a star that has too much gravity to let light escape	Do it is the tremendously dense core of a supermassive star?
cloud of gas and dust from which a star forms	Do the ball of gas has become a star!?
two stars that orbit each other	Do this creates an unusual quadruple star system?
type of galaxy that is a rotating disk of stars and dust	Do you can see the disk and central bulge?
star cluster containing up to a few thousand stars	Do the cluster contains red and blue giant stars?
type of galaxy that is oval in shape	Do most contain very little gas and dust because the material has already formed into stars?
the milky way appears as a band of light across the night sky	Do the Milky Way Galaxy looks different to us than other galaxies because our view is from inside of it!?
group of stars that is smaller than a galaxy	Do 8, is 2,500,000 light years away and contains one trillion stars!?
most of the galaxies we see from earth are dwarf galaxies	Do this can occur either by the pull of a larger galaxy or by a collision with another galaxy?
very large group of stars that are held together by gravity	Do the cluster contains red and blue giant stars?
star cluster containing up to tens of thousands of stars	Do the cluster contains red and blue giant stars?
elliptical galaxies have mostly younger blue stars	Do this can occur either by the pull of a larger galaxy or by a collision with another galaxy?
type of galaxy that is neither spiral nor elliptical in shape	Do this can occur either by the pull of a larger galaxy or by a collision with another galaxy?
every star that you see without a telescope is in the milky way galaxy	Do 8, is 2,500,000 light years away and contains one trillion stars!?
our solar system is slowly spinning around our galaxy	Do this can occur either by the pull of a larger galaxy or by a collision with another galaxy?
there are billions of galaxies in the universe	Do 8, is 2,500,000 light years away and contains one trillion stars!?
a star cluster may contain one or more galaxies	Do 8, is 2,500,000 light years away and contains one trillion stars!?
open star clusters contain more stars than globular star clusters	Do the cluster contains red and blue giant stars?
galaxies are divided into types based on size	Do you can see the disk and central bulge?
spiral galaxies are generally older than elliptical galaxies	Do this can occur either by the pull of a larger galaxy or by a collision with another galaxy?
dwarf galaxies are often found near larger galaxies	Do this can occur either by the pull of a larger galaxy or by a collision with another galaxy?
some galaxies contain over a trillion stars	Do 8, is 2,500,000 light years away and contains one trillion stars!?
our solar system is within one of the spiral arms of our galaxy	Do this can occur either by the pull of a larger galaxy or by a collision with another galaxy?
our solar system orbits the central disk of our galaxy	Do you can see the disk and central bulge?
from earth our galaxy looks like a giant spiral	Do this can occur either by the pull of a larger galaxy or by a collision with another galaxy?
particle of rock or mineral	Do 2)?
any mixture of minerals in the solid state	Do rocks can be changed from one type to another, and the rock cycle describes how this happens?
type of rock that forms when sediments are compacted and cemented together	Do rocks can be changed from one type to another, and the rock cycle describes how this happens?
type of rock that forms when existing rock is subjected to high heat and pressure	Do rocks can be changed from one type to another, and the rock cycle describes how this happens?
type of rock that forms when magma or lava cools	Do rocks can be changed from one type to another, and the rock cycle describes how this happens?
continuous series of processes by which rocks change from one type to another	Do rocks can be changed from one type to another, and the rock cycle describes how this happens?
process in which a rock changes to a different type of rock due to extreme heat and pressure	Do rocks can be changed from one type to another, and the rock cycle describes how this happens?
as magma cools all of the mineral grains form at the same temperature	Do rocks can be changed from one type to another, and the rock cycle describes how this happens?
metamorphism may change the chemical composition of a rock	Do even though for us rocks are solid and unchanging, they slowly change all the time?
only one type of mineral can be present in a metamorphic rock	Do 2)?
rocks can be studied through a microscope	Do 2)?
a metamorphic rock must have a different mineral composition than its parent rock	Do 2)?
when a rock changes from one type to another it usually happens very quickly	Do rocks can be changed from one type to another, and the rock cycle describes how this happens?
one type of rock can change to any other type of rock	Do rocks can be changed from one type to another, and the rock cycle describes how this happens?
all the processes of the rock cycle take place underground	Do rocks can be changed from one type to another, and the rock cycle describes how this happens?
to see the minerals in rock you always need to use a microscope	Do 2)?
rocks are named for the minerals they contain and how the minerals came together	Do 2)?
a rock formed from pieces of gravel and sand would be classified as an igneous rock	Do rocks can be changed from one type to another, and the rock cycle describes how this happens?
a rock resulting from the formation of mineral crystals would be classified as a sedimentary rock	Do 2)?
sedimentary rocks include sandstone and shale	Do rocks can be changed from one type to another, and the rock cycle describes how this happens?
plants and animals can act to wear down rocks	Do even though for us rocks are solid and unchanging, they slowly change all the time?
metamorphism may change a rocks mineral composition	Do even though for us rocks are solid and unchanging, they slowly change all the time?
the layer of earth called the mantle is made entirely of igneous rock	Do the lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure?
rock on the ocean floor is intrusive igneous rock	Do the lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure?
the sierra nevada mountains in california are composed mainly of granite	Do the lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure?
a basalt looks light colored partly because its crystals are too small to see	Do 11)?
when melted rock cools more slowly it forms larger crystals	Do the lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure?
volcanic rock may have so many gas bubbles that it can float on water	Do the lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure?
melted rock cools more quickly underground than on earths surface	Do the lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure?
obsidian forms when magma cools and forms crystals	Do the lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure?
granite and rhyolite are high silica rocks	Do 11)?
pumice contains holes because gas bubbles were trapped in lava as it cooled	Do the lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure?
mountain ranges can be made mainly of igneous rocks	Do 11)?
igneous rock is too hard to be used for art works	Do 11)?
basalt crystals are too small to see with the unaided eye	Do 11)?
the combination of minerals in igneous rocks is determined by the composition of the magma or lava	Do 11)?
both porphyry and diorite are extrusive igneous rocks	Do 11)?
any rock that forms when magma or lava cools	Do the lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure?
most common intrusive igneous rock	Do the lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure?
type of igneous rock that forms on earths surface	Do the lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure?
igneous rock that is full of holes	Do the lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure?
most common extrusive igneous rock	Do the lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure?
type of igneous rock that forms beneath earths surface	Do the lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure?
glasslike igneous rock that does not contain mineral crystals	Do 11)?
sandstone is very porous so water can move easily through it	Do picture Rock Name Conglomerate Type of Sedimentary Rock Clastic Breccia Clastic Sandstone Clastic Siltstone Clastic Limestone Bioclastic Coal Organic Picture Rock Name Rock Salt Type of Sedimentary Rock Chemical precipitate?
sedimentary rocks may contain fossils	Do chemicals may precipitate?
avalanches produce horizontal layers of sediments	Do the environment where the sediments are deposited determines the type of sedimentary rock that can form?
like minerals rocks cannot include organic materials	Do chemicals may precipitate?
particles of silt are smaller than particles of clay	Do chemicals may precipitate?
breccia and conglomerate have large sediments that have different shapes	Do picture Rock Name Conglomerate Type of Sedimentary Rock Clastic Breccia Clastic Sandstone Clastic Siltstone Clastic Limestone Bioclastic Coal Organic Picture Rock Name Rock Salt Type of Sedimentary Rock Chemical precipitate?
fossils are always the remains of bones or teeth	Do the environment where the sediments are deposited determines the type of sedimentary rock that can form?
sediments are pieces of rock	Do picture Rock Name Conglomerate Type of Sedimentary Rock Clastic Breccia Clastic Sandstone Clastic Siltstone Clastic Limestone Bioclastic Coal Organic Picture Rock Name Rock Salt Type of Sedimentary Rock Chemical precipitate?
coal is not a sedimentary rock	Do chemicals may precipitate?
sediments on a beach may include cobbles and pebbles	Do the environment where the sediments are deposited determines the type of sedimentary rock that can form?
cementation occurs when the fluids in the free spaces of the sediments crystallize	Do shale is made mostly of clay-sized particles and hardened mud?
a rock that includes fossil fragments is a bioclastic rock	Do picture Rock Name Conglomerate Type of Sedimentary Rock Clastic Breccia Clastic Sandstone Clastic Siltstone Clastic Limestone Bioclastic Coal Organic Picture Rock Name Rock Salt Type of Sedimentary Rock Chemical precipitate?
all sedimentary rocks form from sediments	Do chemicals may precipitate?
shale may contain hardened mud	Do shale is made mostly of clay-sized particles and hardened mud?
limestone is a chemical sedimentary rock	Do chemicals may precipitate?
type of sedimentary rock that forms when crystals precipitate out of liquid	Do chemicals may precipitate?
squeezed together by upper layers of sediments	Do shale is made mostly of clay-sized particles and hardened mud?
type of sedimentary rock that forms when rock fragments are compacted and cemented together	Do chemicals may precipitate?
preserved material left behind by a onceliving organism	Do the environment where the sediments are deposited determines the type of sedimentary rock that can form?
stuck together by minerals that fill in spaces between sediments	Do shale is made mostly of clay-sized particles and hardened mud?
example of a clastic sedimentary rock	Do chemicals may precipitate?
example of a chemical sedimentary rock	Do chemicals may precipitate?
type of metamorphism in which magma contacts a rock and changes it by extreme heat	Do gneiss forms by regional metamorphism from extremely high temperature and pressure?
any rock formed by extreme heat and pressure	Do gneiss forms by regional metamorphism from extremely high temperature and pressure?
metamorphic rock with alternating bands of light and dark crystals	Do gneiss forms by regional metamorphism from extremely high temperature and pressure?
type of metamorphism in which great masses of rock are exposed to extreme pressure	Do gneiss forms by regional metamorphism from extremely high temperature and pressure?
formation of layers in some metamorphic rock	Do gneiss forms by regional metamorphism from extremely high temperature and pressure?
metamorphic rock that is crushed and used to build railroad tracks	Do schist and slate are sometimes used as building and landscape materials?
metamorphic rock that is used to make statues	Do schist and slate are sometimes used as building and landscape materials?
foliation occurs when pressure is exerted from all directions equally	Do gneiss forms by regional metamorphism from extremely high temperature and pressure?
regional metamorphism may expose rocks to high pressure and low temperature	Do gneiss forms by regional metamorphism from extremely high temperature and pressure?
a metamorphic rock can be metamorphosed	Do schist and slate are sometimes used as building and landscape materials?
a metamorphic rock nearly always resembles its original parent rock	Do schist and slate are sometimes used as building and landscape materials?
metamorphic rocks can always be distinguished from igneous and sedimentary rocks because they are	Do schist and slate are sometimes used as building and landscape materials?
when a rock undergoes metamorphism it becomes an entirely new type of rock	Do gneiss forms by regional metamorphism from extremely high temperature and pressure?
during metamorphism ions may move and new minerals may form	Do gneiss forms by regional metamorphism from extremely high temperature and pressure?
there are two types of metamorphism	Do gneiss forms by regional metamorphism from extremely high temperature and pressure?
contact metamorphism causes rock to melt and form magma	Do gneiss forms by regional metamorphism from extremely high temperature and pressure?
the most commonly used metamorphic rocks are slate and gneiss	Do schist and slate are sometimes used as building and landscape materials?
quartzite is a relatively soft metamorphic rock	Do schist and slate are sometimes used as building and landscape materials?
gneiss forms by contact metamorphism	Do gneiss forms by regional metamorphism from extremely high temperature and pressure?
schist is sometimes used as a landscaping material	Do schist and slate are sometimes used as building and landscape materials?
in the 1500s michelangelo carved statues from marble	Do schist and slate are sometimes used as building and landscape materials?
metamorphic rocks cannot undergo further metamorphism and change to different types of rocks	Do schist and slate are sometimes used as building and landscape materials?
any material that stores energy and releases it in a chemical change	Do heat is given off when fuel is burned?
law that energy cannot be created or destroyed	Do they also observed that the overall amount of energy did not change?
energy that has the potential to do work	Do heat is given off when fuel is burned?
coal oil or natural gas	Do the most important of these may be the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide?
ability to move or change matter	Do heat is given off when fuel is burned?
form of energy obtained from food	Do heat is given off when fuel is burned?
energy of moving matter	Do heat is given off when fuel is burned?
plants make food using energy from soil nutrients	Do heat is given off when fuel is burned?
fossil fuels are made of minerals and rocks	Do the most important of these may be the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide?
uneven heating by the sun causes wind	Do radioactivity is an important source of energy?
the suns energy drives the water cycle	Do heat is given off when fuel is burned?
kicking a soccer ball changes kinetic energy to potential energy	Do the same is true for anything that involves change?
the head of a match stores chemical energy	Do heat is given off when fuel is burned?
it takes millions of years for fossil fuels to form	Do the most important of these may be the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide?
most fossil fuels will last for another 500 years	Do the most important of these may be the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide?
trees are a source of biomass energy	Do heat is given off when fuel is burned?
geothermal energy is a nonrenewable resource	Do heat is given off when fuel is burned?
fossil fuel that produces the least pollution when burned	Do still, natural gas does emit pollutants?
hardest form of coal	Do coal is useful as a fuel, especially for generating electricity?
solid fossil fuel	Do coal is useful as a fuel, especially for generating electricity?
fossil fuels come from the remains of ancient organisms	Do one difference between natural gas and oil is that natural gas forms at higher temperatures?
element used to produce nuclear power	Do this releases a huge amount of energy?
hydrocarbons are all liquids like gasoline	Do these fuels provide about 90% of the energy used for transportation around the world?
liquid fossil fuel	Do coal is useful as a fuel, especially for generating electricity?
main component of natural gas	Do natural gas is mostly methane?
oil and gas will fill our needs for a time period on the order of thousands of years	Do natural gas is mostly methane?
any compound consisting of carbon and hydrogen	Do still, natural gas does emit pollutants?
nuclear power plants produce so much energy because the process is not controlled	Do this releases a huge amount of energy?
natural gas is useful as a fuel moreorless as it comes out of the ground	Do natural gas is mostly methane?
fossil fuels are compounds known as hydrocarbons	Do one difference between natural gas and oil is that natural gas forms at higher temperatures?
unlike other types of coal anthracite is igneous rock	Do coal is mostly carbon, but some other elements can be found in coal, including sulfur?
most of the coal in the united states is found in the rocky mountains	Do coal is useful as a fuel, especially for generating electricity?
petroleum formed at the bottom of ancient seas	Do the gaseous form is natural gas?
the united states produces more oil than it uses	Do oil moves through permeable rock and is trapped by the impermeable cap rock?
burning gasoline leads to smog and groundlevel ozone	Do similar pollutants come from other forms of oil?
natural gas is obtained from earths atmosphere	Do natural gas is mostly methane?
most coal contains the element sulfur	Do coal is useful as a fuel, especially for generating electricity?
nuclear energy is a renewable energy resource	Do this releases a huge amount of energy?
fuel rods in nuclear power plants are made of carbon	Do this in turn produces electricity?
wind power has only been harnessed in recent years	Do this horizontal movement of air is called wind?
the largest geothermal power planet in the united states is in iceland	Do many parts of the world do not have underground sources of heat that are close enough to the surface for building geothermal power plants?
to produce electricity a resource must somehow turn a turbine	Do at this time, wave and tidal power are rare?
the land upstream of a dam may be flooded	Do wave power plants must withstand coastal storms and the corrosion of seawater?
most of earths energy comes directly or indirectly from the sun	Do the Suns heat can also be trapped in your home by using south facing windows and good insulation?
the sun is planet earths main source of energy	Do 7)?
solar energy has been used by people only since the late 1900s	Do in the United States, the southwestern deserts are well suited for solar plants?
a solar cell consists of many solar panels	Do in the United States, the southwestern deserts are well suited for solar plants?
solar power plants use mirrors to focus sunlight	Do in the United States, the southwestern deserts are well suited for solar plants?
the technology needed for most uses of solar energy is expensive	Do until solar technology becomes more affordable, most people will prefer to get their energy from other sources?
streams with wide valleys are best for producing hydroelectric power	Do most of Californias nearly 400 hydroelectric power plants are located in the Sierra Nevada mountains?
using water power has no negative effects on the environment	Do wave power plants must withstand coastal storms and the corrosion of seawater?
wind turbines are inexpensive and long lasting	Do this horizontal movement of air is called wind?
some car engines can run on pure vegetable oil	Do this could help us do something about the problem of global warming?
geothermal energy can be used without processing	Do uRL:?
fuel made from plants	Do in the United States, the southwestern deserts are well suited for solar plants?
device that changes sunlight directly to electricity	Do the Suns heat can also be trapped in your home by using south facing windows and good insulation?
transfer of energy between two objects that are in contact	Do at a solar power plant, the energy conducted by the heated liquid is used to make electricity?
transfer of energy through a liquid by currents	Do in the United States, the southwestern deserts are well suited for solar plants?
source of the suns energy	Do at this time, wave and tidal power are rare?
transfer of energy by waves that can travel through matter or across space	Do at this time, wave and tidal power are rare?
electricity produced by harnessing the energy of flowing water	Do the turbine is connected to a generator, which makes electricity?
region of magnetic force surrounding a magnet	Do some rocks contain little compasses too! As lava cools, tiny iron-rich crystals line up with Earths magnetic field?
evidence for continental drift identified after wegeners death	Do wegener found that this evidence was best explained if the continents had at one time been joined together?
hypothesis that continents move over earths surface	Do wegener found that this evidence was best explained if the continents had at one time been joined together?
evidence for continental drift identified by wegener	Do wegener found that this evidence was best explained if the continents had at one time been joined together?
similar fossil records across continents was evidence for continental drift	Do wegener found that this evidence was best explained if the continents had at one time been joined together?
former supercontinent that consisted of all the present continents	Do he called his hypothesis continental drift?
the magnetic north pole and geographic north pole are in the same location	Do some rocks contain little compasses too! As lava cools, tiny iron-rich crystals line up with Earths magnetic field?
theory that explains how continents can drift	Do wegener found that this evidence was best explained if the continents had at one time been joined together?
if an ancient coral reef is found in the arctic it means that the continent it is on has drifted	Do wegener thought that the continents have moved since the time of Pangaea?
the continents have never all been together as a single whole continent	Do wegener found that this evidence was best explained if the continents had at one time been joined together?
the locations of ancient climate zones provide evidence for continental drift	Do wegener found that this evidence was best explained if the continents had at one time been joined together?
the theory of plate tectonics was developed before the idea of continental drift	Do wegener found that this evidence was best explained if the continents had at one time been joined together?
wegener believed that all the continents were once joined together	Do wegener found that this evidence was best explained if the continents had at one time been joined together?
wegeners hypothesis of continental drift was widely accepted as soon as it was introduced	Do wegener found that this evidence was best explained if the continents had at one time been joined together?
wegener and his supporters provided a lot of evidence for continental drift	Do wegener found that this evidence was best explained if the continents had at one time been joined together?
wegener found rocks of the same type and age on both sides of the atlantic ocean	Do the mountain range separated as the continents drifted?
wegener suggested that pangaea broke up a short time ago	Do he called his hypothesis continental drift?
wegener developed a theory to explain how continents can drift	Do wegener found that this evidence was best explained if the continents had at one time been joined together?
if very old rocks are above much younger rocks there may be a thrust fault in between	Do 6)?
a deeply buried rock is under compressive stresses	Do 6)?
the terrain known as basinandrange is caused by compressive forces	Do 6)?
the amount the ground moves in an earthquake is called slip	Do 13)?
in a strikeslip fault the dip of the fault plane is vertical	Do 14)?
any force applied to rock is a stress	Do near the surface, if the stress continues, the rock will fracture and break?
when confining stress occurs rock deforms	Do near the surface, if the stress continues, the rock will fracture and break?
compression is the most common stress at convergent plates	Do near the surface, if the stress continues, the rock will fracture and break?
stress is the cause of joints in rock	Do 6)?
a syncline is a fold that arches upward	Do basins can be enormous, like the Michigan Basin?
an area where faults are clustered is called a fault zone	Do 14)?
movement of rock at faults is the cause of earthquakes	Do 6)?
normal faults are caused by compression stress	Do 6)?
strikeslip faults result from shear stress	Do 14)?
only the process of folding creates mountain ranges	Do 18)?
fault in which the hanging wall drops down relative to the footwall	Do 13)?
block of rock that is beneath a dipslip fault plane	Do 14)?
fault in which the hanging wall pushes up relative to the footwall	Do 13)?
block of rock that is above a dipslip fault plane	Do 14)?
fault with a fault plane that is not vertical	Do 14)?
fault with a vertical fault plane	Do 14)?
reverse fault in which the fault plane is nearly horizontal	Do 14)?
hot water that seeps out of a crack at the surface	Do hot springs are found all over the world, even in Antarctica!?
igneous rock formation that results when lava cools in the middle of a volcanic crater	Do here the lava creates a large, round lava dome (Figure?
hot water under pressure that forcefully erupts out of the surface	Do if the water makes its way to the surface, it forms a hot spring or a geyser?
type of igneous rock that forms when magma cools below earths surface	Do intrusions become land formations if they are exposed at the surface by erosion?
type of igneous rock that forms when lava cools on earths surface	Do intrusions become land formations if they are exposed at the surface by erosion?
flat surface of igneous rock that forms when thin lava flows over a large area	Do while not exactly a lava plateau, its interesting to think about so much lava!?
intrusive igneous rocks are never visible on earths surface	Do rocks that formed in the crust are exposed when the rock and sediment that covers them is eroded away?
a lava dome is any mountain that forms from lava	Do here the lava creates a large, round lava dome (Figure?
the lava that forms a lava dome is thin and runny	Do here the lava creates a large, round lava dome (Figure?
a lava plateau forms when a volcano produces very little lava	Do here the lava creates a large, round lava dome (Figure?
lava from shield volcanoes created the hawaiian islands	Do this is one way that new land is created?
intrusions form on the surface and later are buried by sediments	Do intrusions become land formations if they are exposed at the surface by erosion?
the water in hot springs is heated by magma	Do if the water makes its way to the surface, it forms a hot spring or a geyser?
agent of chemical weathering	Do smaller pieces dissolve more easily?
weathering process that occurs when water freezes in cracks in rocks	Do if you live in a part of the world that has cold winters, you may only have to wait one year to see a new road start to weather (Figure?
weathering process that occurs when rocks and rock particles scrape other rocks	Do if you live in a part of the world that has cold winters, you may only have to wait one year to see a new road start to weather (Figure?
important agents of chemical weathering include oxygen carbon dioxide and sulfur	Do each of these is discussed below?
rock particle created by weathering	Do you could use the expression a chip off the old block to describe mechanical weathering! The main agents of mechanical weathering are water, ice, and wind?
if temperature increases by 10c the rate of chemical reactions will double	Do smaller pieces dissolve more easily?
type of weathering that breaks rock into smaller pieces	Do you could use the expression a chip off the old block to describe mechanical weathering! The main agents of mechanical weathering are water, ice, and wind?
movement of weathered rock particles	Do if you live in a part of the world that has cold winters, you may only have to wait one year to see a new road start to weather (Figure?
all rocks weather at the same rate	Do if you live in a part of the world that has cold winters, you may only have to wait one year to see a new road start to weather (Figure?
type of weathering that changes the minerals in rock	Do you could use the expression a chip off the old block to describe mechanical weathering! The main agents of mechanical weathering are water, ice, and wind?
abrasion is a type of chemical weathering	Do if you have ever collected beach glass or pebbles from a stream, you have witnessed the work of abrasion?
water can dissolve salt	Do some types of rock can even completely dissolve in water! Other minerals change by adding water into their structure?
natural weathering is usually a very slow process	Do you could use the expression a chip off the old block to describe mechanical weathering! The main agents of mechanical weathering are water, ice, and wind?
grains of sands are weathered particles of rock	Do if you live in a part of the world that has cold winters, you may only have to wait one year to see a new road start to weather (Figure?
agents of mechanical weathering include wind and gravity	Do you could use the expression a chip off the old block to describe mechanical weathering! The main agents of mechanical weathering are water, ice, and wind?
ice wedging occurs only in extremely cold climates	Do )?
pebbles in a stream are worn smooth by abrasion	Do if you have ever collected beach glass or pebbles from a stream, you have witnessed the work of abrasion?
burrowing animals cause mechanical weathering	Do this is common when we build homes, roads, and subways, or quarry stone for construction or other uses?
only acids can dissolve rocks	Do when a less resistant mineral dissolves, more resistant mineral grains are released from the rock?
carbon dioxide makes a weak acid when it combines with oxygen in the air	Do acid rain accelerates chemical weathering?
water is an agent of both mechanical and chemical weathering	Do smaller pieces dissolve more easily?
all rocks weather at the same rate	Do if you live in a part of the world that has cold winters, you may only have to wait one year to see a new road start to weather (Figure?
pollutants emitted from tall smokestacks cause problems because they can create acid rain far from where they were released in other states or nations	Do 2)?
a big problem crops up when acid rain falls in countries that did not produce it	Do 2)?
arid regions do not get enough rain to have problems with acid rain	Do 2)?
changes in genetic makeup of species over time is known as biological evolution	Do changes in the genetic makeup of a species over time are known as biological evolution?
the mechanism for evolution is natural selection	Do uRL:?
all the genetic variation that a population will have exists within it	Do changes in the genetic makeup of a species over time are known as biological evolution?
scientists can determine an exact number for the age of earth materials using radioactivity	Do uRL:?
geologists have pieced together earth history using all of the scientific tools available to them	Do uRL:?
many lines of evidence indicate that earth is 46 billion years old	Do uRL:?
without radiometric dating scientists would still know the absolute age of earth	Do uRL:?
farmers were able to increase the yield of food plants	Do when advanced farming practices allowed farmers to grow more food than they needed for their families (Figure?
the use of artificial fertilizers and chemical pesticides has not increased much in the past 50 years	Do the Green Revolution is credited for feeding 1 billion people that would not otherwise have been able to live?
it is possible that earths carrying capacity for humans is around 1 billion	Do what have been the important developments that have allowed population to grow?
all air pollutants are humanmade materials	Do pollutants dirty the air, change natural processes in the atmosphere, and harm living things?
as of 2013 most of the smoggiest cities in the united states were in california	Do area El Centro, California?
smog can build up on a winter day because inversions trap pollutants in a cool air mass	Do area El Centro, California?
asteroids are too small to have impacts with other objects so they dont have craters	Do uRL:?
we dont know much about asteroids because they are too small for nasa missions to visit them	Do uRL:  The NEAR Shoemaker probe took this photo as it was about to land on 433 Eros in 2001?
an asteroid the size of mars hit earth sending fragments of earth into space to create the moon	Do asteroid impacts are linked to mass extinctions throughout Earths history?
an asteroid could cause humans to go extinct	Do a painting of what an asteroid a few kilometers across might look like as it strikes Earth?
if a nation is wealthy it can determine the price of a resource	Do tampa Bay, Florida, has one of the few desalination plants in the United States?
overconsumption is the recognition that people in developed countries use many more natural resources than people in developing countries	Do pollution from discarded materials de- grades the environment and reduces the availability of natural resources?
discarding an item costs natural resources and contributes to pollution	Do there are even resources, such as diamonds and rubies, that are valuable in part because they are so rare?
since natural resources are distributed fairly evenly around the planet nations can usually obtain what they need	Do there are even resources, such as diamonds and rubies, that are valuable in part because they are so rare?
from the bottom of the deepest trench to the top of the highest mountain the relief of the pacific ocean basin totals nearly 70000 feet	Do uRL:?
the continental shelf is made up of the continental margin continental slope and continental rise	Do uRL:?
the first stars didnt form until about 4 billion years after the big bang	Do what came before the Big Bang? There is no way for scientists to know since there is no remaining evidence?
scientists have discovered the temperature of space is 3oc	Do uRL:?
its very difficult to determine scientifically what existed before the big bang because there is no evidence	Do what came before the Big Bang? There is no way for scientists to know since there is no remaining evidence?
you breathe in oxygen and breathe out carbon dioxide	Do the short term cycling of carbon begins with carbon dioxide (CO2 ) in the atmosphere?
respiration and photosynthesis are gas exchange processes with the exchange being between co2 and o2	Do 1)?
the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is very low but small changes make a big difference	Do the short term cycling of carbon begins with carbon dioxide (CO2 ) in the atmosphere?
burning trees produces most of the same pollutants as burning fossil fuels	Do nearly half (49%) of air pollution comes from transportation, 28% from factories and power plants, and the remaining pollution from a variety of other sources?
amino acids are linked together by ionic bonds to form monomers called polypeptides	Do be capable of replication (be able to reproduce)?
in the millerurey experiment electric sparks provided the energy that drove the chemical reactions	Do meteorites containing amino acids currently enter the Earth system and so meteorites could have delivered amino acids to the planet from elsewhere in the solar system (where they would have formed by processes similar to those outlined here)?
scientists think that life on earth originated once	Do an important question facing scientists is where the first amino acids came from: did they originate on Earth or did they fly in from outer space? No matter where they originated, the creation of amino acids requires the right starting materials and some energy?
a primary protein structure is a sequence of a chain of amino acids	Do be capable of replication (be able to reproduce)?
a polar molecule is slightly positive on one side and slightly negative on the other	Do negative ions and the negative side is attracted to positive ions?
table salt is an example of hydrogen bonding in which sodium is positive and chlorine is negative	Do negative ions and the negative side is attracted to positive ions?
covalent bonds are weak it does not take a lot of energy to break them apart	Do negative ions and the negative side is attracted to positive ions?
water forms droplets because a hydrogen bond is a strong bond	Do negative ions and the negative side is attracted to positive ions?
elements on the left side of the periodic table are electron donors while those on the right side are electron acceptors	Do negative ions and the negative side is attracted to positive ions?
it is easier and cheaper to clean up groundwater than to prevent it	Do if the toxic materials can be removed from the aquifer, disposing of them is another challenge?
the most dangerous contaminants in water are the ones that are visible	Do uRL:?
pumping water to the surface to clean the pollutant is more expensive than in situ cleaning methods because the soil and rock must be cleaned too	Do if the toxic materials can be removed from the aquifer, disposing of them is another challenge?
throughout earths history its climate has always been colder and less humid than it is today	Do uRL:?
when glaciers retreat sea level rises	Do uRL:?
fairly small changes in temperature can have major effects on global climate	Do uRL:?
since the end of the ice ages temperature had been getting steadily warmer although not uniformly warmer	Do uRL:?
plants that live in the same biome but on different continents share the same characteristics	Do uRL:?
the moist subtropical midlatitude climate zones are found along the coastal areas in the united states	Do rainfall: There is plentiful annual rainfall?
most precipitation in the polar climates occurs in the summer	Do since climate determines the type of vegetation that grows in an area, vegetation is used as an indicator of climate type?
for coal to form during burial the organic matter must be kept away from nitrogen	Do millions of years later, what remains is a carbon- containing rock that we know as coal?
coal that forms at higher temperatures burns more cleanly	Do for this reason, anthracite coal burns more cleanly than bituminous coal?
most ocean pollution comes from land and is found in or near coastal regions	Do more than one-third of the shellfish-growing waters of the United States are adversely affected by coastal pollution?
fish are affected by oceanic pollutants but humans are not affected because they do not live in the ocean	Do more than one-third of the shellfish-growing waters of the United States are adversely affected by coastal pollution?
ships at sea treat their wastes and bring their trash back to land for recycling	Do more than one-third of the shellfish-growing waters of the United States are adversely affected by coastal pollution?
without its tail a comet looks like a ball of ice	Do the first mention of the comet in historical records may go back as much as two millennia?
the oort cloud is about 50000100000 au from the sun	Do uRL:?
plant whatever types of plants you like no matter where you live	Do good behavior can be encouraged; for example, people can be given an incentive to replace grass with desert plants in arid regions?
lawns and golf courses conserve water because they trap water within them	Do uRL:?
it is better to sweep the sidewalks rather than hosing them down with water	Do uRL:?
it may not seem like much but putting water on a toothbrush as needed rather than letting the water flow makes an impact especially if lots of people do it	Do uRL:?
scientists in the early 20th century thought that land bridges allowed land animals to travel between africa and south america	Do what sort of evidence would you look for to see if the continents had actually been joined and had moved apart?
fossils of the seed fern glossopteris were easily carried by wind across oceans	Do uRL:?
continental drift is the idea that move around on earths surface	Do uRL:?
the reason the hypothesis that mountains cooled in that form from molten material is good is that mountains are the same age	Do uRL:?
coriolis effect occurs because earth is rotating beneath a moving object	Do uRL:?
freely moving objects appear to move to the right in the southern hemisphere	Do uRL:?
you can tell which hemisphere youre in because water in a drain always spirals right in the northern hemisphere and left in the southern hemisphere	Do uRL:?
coriolis is an effect because it is not forcing the movement of objects to change it just appears that the movement of objects is not straight	Do uRL:?
a thin rock unit with a high concentration of a very rare element in it found all over the globe could be the same unit	Do 1)?
the only useful index fossils are shells and skeletons of marine organisms	Do the famous White Cliffs of Dover in southwest England can be matched to similar white cliffs in Denmark and Germany?
a good example of a key bed is the thin clay with high iridium that indicates that a huge asteroid struck earth 66 million years ago	Do uRL:?
water is denser when salt is added	Do if salt is added to a volume of water, there are more molecules in the same volume, so the water is denser?
downwelling takes place at some coastlines or along the equators and brings nutrientrich water to the surface	Do uRL:?
ocean currents move through the surface and deep in a large system like a conveyor belt	Do uRL:?
older rocks lie above the younger rocks	Do uRL:?
a fault can cut through three or more sedimentary rock layers	Do uRL:?
a fault can shift rocks so that the layers no longer match up	Do uRL:?
if we learn the succession of geological events in a region it only tells us about that region and does not apply to other locations	Do uRL:?
the law of conservation of energy says that energy cannot be created or destroyed	Do this leads us to ask this question: Why is atmospheric CO2 increasing?
kinetic energy is energy associated with the movement of atoms or molecules that can be transferred	Do this leads us to ask this question: Why is atmospheric CO2 increasing?
animals and plants get energy directly or indirectly from the sun	Do this leads us to ask this question: Why is atmospheric CO2 increasing?
to test parallax put your finger about one foot in front of your eyes and then look at it from one eye and then the other	Do from the size of this shift, astronomers can calculate the distance to the star?
even with the most precise instruments available parallax is too small to measure the distance to stars that are more than a few hundred light years away	Do the astronomer compares the observed brightness to the expected brightness?
the more distant the star the more accurate our estimate of its distance	Do the astronomer compares the observed brightness to the expected brightness?
fresh water has no salts at all	Do uRL:?
a single water molecule may remain in a reservoir for a long or a short time	Do uRL:?
all of earths water supply is accessible for us to use	Do uRL:?
earth is unique in our solar system because it has such a large liquid water ocean	Do uRL:?
pluto was thought to be one of nine planets in our solar system from 1930 to 2006	Do not be a moon?
although it is in the asteroid belt ceres is not an asteroid because it is spherical	Do as part of the asteroid belt, its orbit is full of other smaller bodies, so Ceres fails the fourth criterion for being a planet?
the final totals are 8 planets and 5 dwarf planets in the solar system	Do not be a moon?
the gas that formed the early atmosphere came entirely from earths interior	Do frequent impacts by asteroids and comets brought in gases and ices, including water, carbon dioxide, methane, ammonia, nitrogen, and other volatiles from elsewhere in the solar system (Figure Calculations also show that asteroids and comets cannot be responsible for all of the gases of the early atmosphere, so both impacts and outgassing were needed?
the early atmosphere didnt have oxygen because plants had not yet evolved	Do uRL:?
the great oxygenation event occurred when animals became common	Do this opened up many opportunities for organisms to evolve to fill different niches and many new types of organisms first appeared on Earth?
finding clam shells in a rock indicates that the region was once shallow marine	Do sometimes fossils of marine organisms are found on tall mountains indicating that rocks that formed on the seabed were uplifted?
an index fossil must be distinctive widespread and shortlived so that it can identify a specific period of time	Do the fossil of a juvenile mammoth found near downtown San Jose California reveals an enormous amount about these majestic creatures: what they looked like, how they lived, and what the environment of the Bay Area was like so long ago?
the core is less dense than the surface layers	Do uRL:?
scientists believe that metallic meteorites are representative of the core	Do uRL:?
seismic waves indicate that the inner core is a solid and the outer core is a liquid	Do uRL:?
scientists learn about earths interior from seismic waves rocks and calculations of density and magnetism	Do what factors have exposed sedimentary rock?
iron and nickel are both magnetic	Do instead of invoking supernatural forces, Steno concluded that fossils were once parts of living creatures?
we cant travel to the center of the earth in a volcanic tube because the pressure is so great it would close any tube that existed	Do the fossil record is our best clue to the history of life on Earth, and an important indicator of past climates and geological conditions as well?
sometimes earths magnetic north pole becomes its magnetic south pole and vice versa	Do the magnetic field arises from the convection of molten iron and nickel metals in Earths liquid outer core?
scientists model magnetic reversals to try to determine why they occur	Do uRL:  Earths magnetic field is like a bar magnet resides in the center of the planet?
earths magnetic field has disappeared for long periods of time in earth history	Do the magnetic field arises from the convection of molten iron and nickel metals in Earths liquid outer core?
without earths magnetic field complex life could probably not exist	Do the magnetic field arises from the convection of molten iron and nickel metals in Earths liquid outer core?
it wasnt until johannes kepler that people realized that earth was round	Do the planet bulges around the equator due to mass collecting in the middle due to rotational momentum?
earths shape is a bit squished at the poles and bulges at the equator	Do the planet bulges around the equator due to mass collecting in the middle due to rotational momentum?
earths minor axis is the diameter through its poles	Do the planet bulges around the equator due to mass collecting in the middle due to rotational momentum?
the diameter through the poles is larger than the diameter through the equator	Do the planet bulges around the equator due to mass collecting in the middle due to rotational momentum?
a solar eclipse occurs when the moons shadow completely blocks the sun	Do uRL:?
solar eclipses last only a few minutes because the moon casts a small shadow	Do uRL:?
during a lunar eclipse darkness in the middle of the day may cause temperatures to cool and stars to become visible	Do uRL:?
the penumbra is the inner coneshaped part of the shadow in which all light has been blocked	Do a lunar eclipse does not occur every month because Moons orbit is inclined 5-degrees to Earths orbit, so the two bodies are not in the same plane every month?
the polar regions receive the most solar radiation because their summer days are 6 month long	Do the high albedo, because of ice and snow, reflects a good portion of the Suns light?
the number of hours of daylight is equal all year long at the equator	Do the high albedo, because of ice and snow, reflects a good portion of the Suns light?
latitude is the only factor that determines the temperature of a region	Do the high albedo, because of ice and snow, reflects a good portion of the Suns light?
at the equator the sun is just about directly overhead at midday	Do the high albedo, because of ice and snow, reflects a good portion of the Suns light?
scientists are certain that the increase in air pollution is causing the increase in lung cancer	Do human health suffers in locations with high levels of air pollution?
a person exposed to air pollution is more likely to get lung cancer	Do human health suffers in locations with high levels of air pollution?
breathing air into which weve emitted pollutants is not much different from throwing trash in our food supply and eating it	Do by some estimates, 30,000 deaths a year in the United States are caused by fine particle pollution?
according to one study no amount of air pollution is safe to breathe	Do human health suffers in locations with high levels of air pollution?
radiation transfers energy by electromagnetic waves	Do if no more heat is added, eventually all of a material will reach the same temperature?
violet light has the longest wavelengths for visible light	Do if no more heat is added, eventually all of a material will reach the same temperature?
plants convert solar energy to chemical energy	Do if no more heat is added, eventually all of a material will reach the same temperature?
a snow field has a low albedo	Do if no more heat is added, eventually all of a material will reach the same temperature?
conserving energy is cleaner and cheaper than finding new energy	Do you can read below about some of the ways you can conserve energy on the road and in the home?
using energy more efficiently will help our energy resources last a longer time	Do you can read below about some of the ways you can conserve energy on the road and in the home?
fossil fuels burn cleaner than biofuels	Do sounds like a win-win situation?
cow manure can be a source of methane gas which can be converted to electricity	Do sounds like a win-win situation?
biomass from which sugars are released and fermented create fuel	Do corn is a very inefficient source; scientists are looking for much better sources of biomass energy?
wood has been one of the oldest fuels used for warmth or to cook food	Do sounds like a win-win situation?
all of the energy resources listed in question 1 are nonrenewable resources	Do they include solar energy from sunlight, geothermal energy from under Earths surface, wind, biomass (from once-living things or their wastes), and hydropower (from running water)?
in the us the most commonly used renewable energy resource is solar energy	Do they include solar energy from sunlight, geothermal energy from under Earths surface, wind, biomass (from once-living things or their wastes), and hydropower (from running water)?
people in the us use far more energy per person than people in any other country	Do q: How does the use of oil and other fossil fuels relate to pollution? A: Greater use of oil and other fossil fuels causes more pollution?
acid flowing from coal mines in missouri polluted the water and land	Do uRL:  Acid drainage from a surface coal mine in Missouri?
older mines must also be reclaimed by us law	Do uRL:  Acid drainage from a surface coal mine in Missouri?
personal electronics are full of metals and other substances that come from mining	Do uRL:  Acid drainage from a surface coal mine in Missouri?
heavy metals are among the pollutants that can come off a mine	Do uRL:  Acid drainage from a surface coal mine in Missouri?
there have been more than 1800 exoplanets identified and confirmed	Do uRL:?
exoplanets orbit a star other than the sun	Do uRL:?
new extrasolar planets are identified very rarely only about once per decade	Do uRL:?
according to statistical studies the milky way galaxy may contain about 100 billion planets	Do uRL:?
the universe is expanding in threedimensions	Do his data would eventually show how the universe is changing, and would even yield clues as to how the universe formed?
astronomers determine the composition of a star by examining the dark absorption lines	Do uRL:?
if a galaxy is moving closer to earth it would have a blueshift	Do uRL:?
as the universe expands the galaxies are also expanding	Do his data would eventually show how the universe is changing, and would even yield clues as to how the universe formed?
horizontalappearing layers can have a younger rock below an older rock if they are separated by a thrust fault	Do there may or may not be movement along the fracture?
in a normal fault the hanging wall goes up and the footwall goes down	Do they are responsible for uplifting mountain ranges in regions experiencing tensional stress?
flooding is often worse when vegetation is cleared	Do 2 was created with the recognition that the Mississippi River sometimes simply cannot be contained by levees and must be allowed to flood?
floods are relatively recent phenomenon only occurring since humans have altered the landscape	Do uRL:?
the lands downstream from a dam are safe from flooding	Do 2 was created with the recognition that the Mississippi River sometimes simply cannot be contained by levees and must be allowed to flood?
an anticline in three dimensions is a basin	Do if the top of the dome is sliced off, where are the oldest rocks located?
a dome is a structure made when rocks arch upward	Do if the top of the dome is sliced off, where are the oldest rocks located?
when rocks are bent into a fold they may go back to their original shape if the stress is released	Do you can see three types of folds?
in a syncline the youngest rocks are outside and the oldest rocks are in the center	Do if the top of the dome is sliced off, where are the oldest rocks located?
due to gravity planetoids got larger and larger until they became planets	Do the history of Earth is part of the history of the Solar System?
there was more radioactive decay early in earth history than now because many radioactive elements have long half lives	Do the history of Earth is part of the history of the Solar System?
gravity releases energy when material is squeezed so hard that the pressure swells	Do very few large objects have struck the planet in the past many hundreds of millions of year?
the moon formed at the same time earth formed	Do understanding the Moons birth and early history reveals a great deal about Earths early days?
the genesis rock is a piece of the moons original crust	Do why do you think Moon rocks contain information that is not available from Earths own materials? Can you find how all of the evidence presented in the bullet points above is present in the Moons birth story?
in the early solar system there was a lot of debris  asteroids comets and planetoids  flying around	Do earths fast spin is from energy imparted to it by the impact?
the nebular was drawn together by gravity which released kinetic energy	Do the disk contained hydrogen and helium, along with heavier elements and even simple organic molecules?
materials that on earth are liquids or gases are solids in the outer planets	Do uRL:?
fossil fuels are a very poor source of energy	Do uRL:?
most of the fossil fuels we use today formed hundreds of millions of years ago	Do uRL:?
being nonrenewable resources fossil fuels will last on the order of decades for coal and centuries for oil and natural gas	Do 1)?
although petroleum coal and natural gas will eventually run out tar sands and oil shale will be available for centuries at no more cost than traditional sources of fossil fuels	Do 1)?
if people everyone in the developed world froze their use of oil at its current level the annual amount of oil used would not increase	Do 1)?
the keystone xl pipeline is controversial because the oil it carries could cause environmental damage	Do uRL:?
freshwater ecosystems include lakes ponds streams and wetlands	Do these ecosys- tems vary by temperature, pressure (in lakes), the amount of light that penetrates and the type of vegetation that lives there?
wetlands make up more than 30 of the land in the us but have only 5 of the plant types	Do since wetlands naturally purify water, preserving wetlands also helps to maintain clean supplies of water?
wetlands never contain more than a few trees	Do a salt marsh on Cape Cod in Mas- sachusetts?
galaxies can contain billions or trillions of stars	Do but that fuzzy spot contains one trillion  1,000,000,000,000  stars! Galaxies are divided into three types according to shape: spiral galaxies, elliptical galaxies, and irregular galaxies?
irregular galaxies may be deformed by gravitational attraction to another galaxy	Do this galaxy, called NGC 1427A, has nei- ther a spiral nor an elliptical shape?
naming time periods makes it easier to talk about them	Do why do you think that the more recent time periods are divided more finely? Do you think the divisions in the scale below are proportional to the amount of time each time period represented in Earth history? In what eon, era, period and epoch do we now live? We live in the Holocene (sometimes called Recent) epoch, Quaternary period, Cenozoic era, and Phanerozoic eon?
about 18 of earth history passed before the explosion of life forms in the cambrian	Do january 1 12 am: Earth forms from the planetary nebula - 4600 million years ago February 25, 12:30 pm: The origin of life; the first cells - 3900 million years ago March 4, 3:39 pm: Oldest dated rocks - 3800 million years ago March 20, 1:33 pm: First stromatolite fossils - 3600 million years ago July 17, 9:54 pm: first fossil evidence of cells with nuclei - 2100 million years ago November 18, 5:11 pm: Cambrian Explosion - 544 million years ago December 1, 8:49 am: first insects - 385 million years ago December 2, 3:54 am: first land animals, amphibians - 375 million years ago December 5, 5:50 pm: first reptiles - 330 million years ago December 12, 12:09 pm: Permo-Triassic Extinction - 245 million years ago December 13, 8:37 pm: first dinosaurs - 228 million years ago December 14, 9:59 am: first mammals  220 million years ago December 22, 8:24 pm: first flowering plants - 115 million years ago December 26, 7:52 pm: Cretaceous-Tertiary Extinction - 66 million years ago December 26, 9:47 pm: first ancestors of dogs - 64 million years ago December 27, 5:25 am: widespread grasses - 60 million years ago December 27, 11:09 am: first ancestors of pigs and deer - 57 million years ago December 28, 9:31 pm: first monkeys - 39 million years ago December 31, 5:18 pm: oldest hominid - 4 million years ago December 31, 11:02 pm: oldest direct human ancestor - 1 million years ago December 31, 11:48 pm: first modern human - 200,000 years ago December 31, 11:59 pm: Revolutionary War - 235 years ago?
eon era period epoch is the order from the largest amount of time to the smallest amount of time	Do why do you think that the more recent time periods are divided more finely? Do you think the divisions in the scale below are proportional to the amount of time each time period represented in Earth history? In what eon, era, period and epoch do we now live? We live in the Holocene (sometimes called Recent) epoch, Quaternary period, Cenozoic era, and Phanerozoic eon?
a sudden stress is more likely to make a rock fracture than a show increasing stress	Do uRL:?
tension occurs at divergent boundaries	Do a rocks response to stress depends on the rock type, the surrounding temperature, the pressure conditions the rock is under, the length of time the rock is under stress, and the type of stress?
geothermal energy creates greenhouse gases and other pollutants	Do uRL:?
at any geothermal plant the energy will run out as cold water cools the hot rock	Do uRL:?
the likely source of heat for the largest geothermal plant in california is a large magma chamber	Do uRL:?
in some locations hot rocks are too deep to be used for geothermal energy	Do uRL:?
when a glacier no longer moves it is called an ice sheet	Do 1 km2 in area and 50 m thick?
gem glacier in glacier national park is no longer moving but it is still a glacier	Do 1 km2 in area and 50 m thick?
global average temperatures are increasing and we are already seeing the effects of this	Do this is known as global warming?
when ice caps melt the sea level decreases	Do uRL:?
burning fossil fuels adds greenhouse gases to the air	Do this is known as global warming?
permafrost is melting but its extent is increasing	Do uRL:?
the greater an objects mass the greater the force of attraction	Do uRL:?
the farther the distance between two objects the greater the attraction	Do uRL:?
all greenhouse gases are emitted by natural processes	Do greenhouse gases are the component of the atmosphere that moderate Earths temperatures?
one cfc12 molecule traps 10600 times as much heat as one co2 molecule	Do still, CO2 is a very important greenhouse gas because it is much more abundant in the atmosphere?
atmospheric greenhouse gas levels are increasing due to human activities	Do uRL:?
if you were going to drill a well into an aquifer it would be a shorter distance to drill down into a valley than down into a hill	Do people take water from aquifers, too?
all springs flow all year round	Do springs can be an extremely important source of water in locations where surface water is scarce?
to be a good aquifer the only important quality for a rock to have is high porosity	Do a well penetrates the water table?
wells may go completely dry if they are not deep enough to reach in a lowered water table	Do subsidence and saltwater intrusion are two of them?
when a water table decline wells must be drilled deeper	Do subsidence and saltwater intrusion are two of them?
groundwater is a stable supply of water and can never be depleted	Do subsidence and saltwater intrusion are two of them?
the water in the ogallala aquifer is mostly from the last ice age	Do , particularly in Texas and New Mexico?
more than 100000 tanks of toxic substances are currently leaking underground	Do toxic substances and things like gasoline are kept in underground storage tanks; more than 100,000 of the tanks are currently leaking and many more may develop leaks?
about 25 of groundwater in the united states is polluted	Do as it is, about 25% of the usable groundwater and 45% of the municipal groundwater supplies in the United States are polluted?
groundwater that moves through the rock aquifer for years is decontaminated and drinkable	Do as it is, about 25% of the usable groundwater and 45% of the municipal groundwater supplies in the United States are polluted?
fortunately toxic chemicals that leak onto the ground remain on the ground and do not get into the groundwater supply	Do as it is, about 25% of the usable groundwater and 45% of the municipal groundwater supplies in the United States are polluted?
the rate at which the human population is growing is decreasing	Do the total added will be about 3 billion people, which is more than were even in existence as recently as 1960?
toxic chemicals are all right if they are stored and used properly	Do uRL:?
if you are going to use pesticides or herbicides the more you use the more pests you kill and the better it is	Do uRL:?
the equatorial regions albedo is low because the region is heavily forested	Do the difference in solar energy received at different latitudes drives atmospheric circulation?
the amount of incoming solar radiation is the same at all latitudes	Do the difference in solar energy received at different latitudes drives atmospheric circulation?
night and day each last 6 months in the polar regions	Do the difference in solar energy received at different latitudes drives atmospheric circulation?
about 90 of the solar radiation that strikes the top of the atmosphere is filtered out before it reaches the ground	Do uRL:?
conduction is more effective at higher altitudes where air density is lower	Do uRL:?
the suns rays strike the surface most directly at the equator	Do the difference in solar energy received at different latitudes drives atmospheric circulation?
heat waves have increased in frequency and duration in recent years	Do many states and localities broke records for temperatures and for most days above 100 F?
three months with average daily high temperatures above 100of is normal for phoenix arizona but six days of 100of temperatures in portland oregon is a heat wave	Do many states and localities broke records for temperatures and for most days above 100 F?
people survive in phoenix arizona in intense heat because they are hardier than people in other locations	Do many states and localities broke records for temperatures and for most days above 100 F?
more people die in heat waves than in blizzards tornadoes or hurricanes	Do many states and localities broke records for temperatures and for most days above 100 F?
hot springs are cooler than geysers	Do uRL:?
bison use the hot springs in yellowstone to stay warm in the winter because the hot springs do not freeze	Do the water may emerge at the surface as either a hot spring or a geyser?
old faithful geyser is noteworthy for the frequency and predictability of its eruptions	Do the water may emerge at the surface as either a hot spring or a geyser?
hot springs are only found in the tectonically active western united states	Do the water may emerge at the surface as either a hot spring or a geyser?
nicholas steno in 1666 said that fossils were once part of living creatures because fossils from far inland looked like the teeth of a freshly caught great white shark	Do fossil Shark Tooth (left) and Modern Shark Tooth (right)?
almost every single organism that has ever lived became a fossil	Do how does an organism become fossilized? A rare insect fossil?
the la brea tar pits in los angeles is an example of an unusual circumstance in which a variety of fossils are preserved	Do the fossil record is our best clue to the history of life on Earth, and an important indicator?
soft parts of an organism are never preserved so life before the evolution of hard parts is a complete mystery	Do uRL:?
water in the gulf stream travels along the equator and is cooled as it goes	Do uRL:?
the equator and poles would have even more different climates if it werent for surface ocean currents	Do uRL:?
quebec canada and london england have different climates because they are at different latitudes	Do uRL:?
the energy in the gulf stream could supply the world with energy 100times over	Do uRL:?
humans evolved directly from chimpanzees	Do about 7 million years ago, chimpanzees (our closest living relatives) and humans shared their last common ancestor?
homo sapiens evolved about 200000 years ago	Do about 7 million years ago, chimpanzees (our closest living relatives) and humans shared their last common ancestor?
scientists are certain that our ancestors had a spiritual life at around 32000 years ago as evidenced by their carved stone figurines	Do uRL:  Stone figurines likely indicate a spiritual life?
ultramafic igneous rocks have the lowest amount of silica of any igneous rocks	Do uRL:?
granite is a type of felsic rock	Do different factors play into the composition of a magma and the rock it produces?
granite and andesite have the same composition but different texture	Do different factors play into the composition of a magma and the rock it produces?
gabbro and basalt have the same composition but different texture	Do different factors play into the composition of a magma and the rock it produces?
even an increase of global temperature of 1oc would make a difference to earths environment	Do 2)?
global warming has affected the south pole more than the north pole	Do 2)?
temperatures are rising globally how much they rise in the future depends on our actions in the next decades	Do if nothing is done to decrease the rate of CO2 emissions, by 2030, CO2 emissions are projected to be 63% greater than they were in 2002?
a decrease in snow pack can cause a shortage of the summer water supply in many regions	Do if nothing is done to decrease the rate of CO2 emissions, by 2030, CO2 emissions are projected to be 63% greater than they were in 2002?
at love canal people were told of the toxic chemicals buried beneath their homes and school when the community was built	Do why do you think children and fetuses are more susceptible? Because young organisms grow more rapidly, they take in more of the toxic chemicals and are more affected?
lead poisoning was a problem in the 1970s and 1980s but that has been cleaned up	Do more about the hazards of mercury pollution can be found later in this concept?
the atmosphere is a reservoir for water	Do chlorophyll indicates the presence of photosynthesizing plants as does the veg- etation index?
in space no one can hear you scream because there is not medium for the sound waves to travel through	Do uRL:?
the red chlorophyll hotspots on the chlorophyll map are directly related to the excess nutrients in those areas	Do chlorophyll indicates the presence of photosynthesizing plants as does the veg- etation index?
biodiversity is the total mass of living organisms in a region	Do uRL:?
temperature range is smaller on land near a large water body than on land far from a large water body	Do summer temperatures are not as hot, and winter temperatures are not as cold, because water takes a long time to heat up or cool down?
the oceans important to the water cycle because most evaporation comes from and precipitation falls on the oceans	Do since they cover so much of the planet, most evaporation comes from oceans and most precipitation falls on oceans?
the range of temperatures on earth is much less than the range in temperatures on mercury	Do summer temperatures are not as hot, and winter temperatures are not as cold, because water takes a long time to heat up or cool down?
igneous rocks weather faster than most other rocks because they formed in conditions that are the most different from surface conditions	Do uRL:?
chemical reactions proceed more rapidly at higher temperatures	Do this happens because plants and bacteria grow and multiply faster in warmer temperatures?
when a less resistant mineral dissolves more resistant mineral grains are released from rock	Do uRL:?
precipitation increases both mechanical and chemical weathering	Do the aluminum oxide, bauxite, forms this way and is our main source of aluminum ore?
together all of the planets equal the mass of the sun	Do from left to right, the outer planets are Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune?
all of the inner planets were geologically active at some time in their history	Do from left to right, they are Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars?
saturn is unique in the solar system because it is the only planet with rings	Do from left to right, the outer planets are Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune?
the sun is a ball of material with no layers and no outer boundary	Do since the present is the key to the past, what we know about a type of organism that lives today can be applied to past environments?
when the moon blocks out the sun in a solar eclipse we can still see the corona	Do since the present is the key to the past, what we know about a type of organism that lives today can be applied to past environments?
the temperature of the sun is highest in the central plasma core	Do since the present is the key to the past, what we know about a type of organism that lives today can be applied to past environments?
unconfined aquifers are open to the surface	Do the source region for an aquifer beneath a desert is likely to be far away, perhaps in a mountainous area?
if a shallow well runs dry a deeper well will likely tap another aquifer	Do the source region for an aquifer beneath a desert is likely to be far away, perhaps in a mountainous area?
most groundwater has been in an aquifer for millennia	Do uRL:?
access to groundwater can only be gotten from wells	Do uRL:?
igneous intrusive rock has visible crystals because it cools and solidifies slowly	Do the cooling rate is reflected in the rocks texture?
a pluton is a large igneous rock that cooled inside the crust	Do the cooling rate is reflected in the rocks texture?
if a rock is cooling in a magma chamber for a while and then suddenly erupts it will have a porphyritic texture	Do the cooling rate is reflected in the rocks texture?
lava that cools extremely rapidly may have a crystalline texture	Do the cooling rate is reflected in the rocks texture?
jupiter is so large that it makes its own light	Do it takes Jupiter about 12 Earth years to orbit once around the Sun?
jupiter is 52 times as from the sun as the earth is	Do it takes Jupiter about 12 Earth years to orbit once around the Sun?
glaciers can carry rocks of any size	Do these rocks can be carried for many kilometers for many years?
varves display an annual cycle of dark fine clays deposited in winter and lighter sands deposited in spring	Do uRL:?
engineers can build structures that will protect our shorelines come what may	Do uRL:?
clastic rocks contain fragments of preexisting rock	Do uRL:?
a mudstone that contains shell fragments is a bioclastic rock	Do uRL:?
compaction is when cement from fluids bind sediments together	Do uRL:?
sandstone is a type of clastic rock	Do uRL:?
a latitude of 44o2743 should be followed by an n or s	Do thats just about exactly half way between the Equator and the North Pole!?
earths magnetic north pole and geographic north pole are located at the point where earths axis of rotation intersects the surface	Do uRL:?
a longitude of 44o2743 should be followed by an n or s	Do each minute is divided into 60 seconds?
a compass is a device with a floating needle that acts as a magnet point to magnetic north	Do uRL:?
carbon dioxide and methane levels in the atmosphere are correlated with temperature	Do bP means years before present?
the climate cycle correlates with the sunspot cycle	Do sunspots on the face of the Sun?
when earths axis has less different in its tilt climate is more moderate throughout the year	Do in greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, caused naturally or by human activities?
ice ages happen predictably on a 100000 year cycle that correlates with milankovitch cycles	Do sunspots on the face of the Sun?
submarines during wwii discovered the magnetic patterns on the seafloor	Do research cruises today tow magnetometers to add detail to existing magnetic polarity data?
the magnetic stripes on either side of the midocean ridge the same distance out from the ridge have opposite polarity	Do research cruises today tow magnetometers to add detail to existing magnetic polarity data?
the oldest seafloor is less than 180 million years old	Do uRL:?
observations of the seafloor support the idea that new seafloor is created at mid ocean ridges	Do research cruises today tow magnetometers to add detail to existing magnetic polarity data?
wegener died without knowing that continental drift was accepted	Do this evidence for continental drift gave geologists renewed interest in understanding how continents could move about on the planets surface?
magnetite crystals in young volcanic rocks point to the geographic north pole	Do both the continents and the north pole moved?
if the continents remained fixed while the magnetic pole moved there must have been two separate magnetic north poles	Do since there is only one north pole today, what is the best explanation? The only reasonable explanation is that the magnetic north pole has remained fixed but that the continents have moved?
there is and was only one magnetic north pole	Do since there is only one north pole today, what is the best explanation? The only reasonable explanation is that the magnetic north pole has remained fixed but that the continents have moved?
a bathymetric map represents the depth below sea level	Do a geologic map of the region around Old Faithful, Yellowstone National Park?
on a bathymetric map numbers are negative because they represent depth below sea level	Do a geologic map of the region around Old Faithful, Yellowstone National Park?
contour lines cross on very steep slopes	Do a geologic map of the region around Old Faithful, Yellowstone National Park?
mars is the only planet that humans have walked on	Do although the atmosphere is made up mostly of carbon dioxide, the planet has only a weak greenhouse effect, so temperatures are only slightly higher than if the planet had no atmosphere?
the largest canyon in the solar system called valles marineris is found on mars	Do 3)?
mars has active plate tectonics	Do 3)?
microbial life has been found in the ices of mars	Do 3)?
a seismogram produces a graphlike representation of the seismic waves it receives and records them onto a seismograph	Do the amplitude of the waves can be used to determine the magnitude of the earthquake, which will be discussed in a later section?
the wavelength of the waves can be used to determine the magnitude of an earthquake	Do the amplitude of the waves can be used to determine the magnitude of the earthquake, which will be discussed in a later section?
ice wedging is common at where temperatures commonly vary between above and below freezing	Do ice wedging is common in Earths polar regions and mid latitudes, and also at higher elevations, such as in the mountains?
planet mercury was named for the roman god mercury because it appears to travel rapidly across the face of the sun	Do in other words, on Mercury, a year is only a Mercury day and a half long!?
on mercury each year lasts only 112 days	Do its relatively large, liquid core, made mostly of melted iron, takes up about 42% of the planets volume?
mercury is the closest planet to earth	Do in other words, on Mercury, a year is only a Mercury day and a half long!?
because mercury is so close to the sun the entire planet is scorching hot	Do in other words, on Mercury, a year is only a Mercury day and a half long!?
mercury is a potent neurotoxin	Do in the atmosphere, the mercury forms small droplets that are deposited in water or sediments?
all substances bioaccumulate	Do a person will also get the mercury into her system when she (or he) burns the fat while losing weight?
it is it better to eat fish that are low on the food chain than the large predatory fish because their bodies contain less mercury	Do in the atmosphere, the mercury forms small droplets that are deposited in water or sediments?
the pressure in the mesosphere is so low that the liquids would boil at normal body temperature	Do uRL:?
although the temperature of the mesosphere is extremely low a persons blood would boil at normal body temperature	Do uRL:?
the highest temperature in the mesosphere is at the top which is 90oc	Do uRL:?
hornfels quartzite and marble are all foliated	Do uRL:?
the more extreme the amount of metamorphism the easier it is to tell what the original rock was	Do uRL:?
marble is metamorphosed sandstone	Do uRL:?
metaconglomerate is nonfoliated and displays the pebbles that were part of it when it was a sedimentary rock	Do uRL:?
metamorphic rocks are altered by heat and pressure	Do a foliated metamorphic rock?
minerals metamorphose because they need to be stable under new temperature and pressure conditions	Do hornfels is shown in the table for the "Metamorphic Rock Classification" concept?
the chemical composition of minerals changes during metamorphism because ions move between minerals	Do hornfels is shown in the table for the "Metamorphic Rock Classification" concept?
physical or chemical makeup but not both can change as a rock undergoes metamorphism	Do hornfels is shown in the table for the "Metamorphic Rock Classification" concept?
if an asteroid hits mars bits can enter earths atmosphere as meteors	Do uRL:?
meteoroids are meteors that enter earths atmosphere	Do these clusters are often remnants left behind by comet tails?
meteorites from mars and the moon are the only rocks we have from those bodies	Do uRL:?
many meteorites were formed in the early solar system	Do uRL:?
the solar system formed 46 billion years ago	Do uRL:?
the milky way galaxy formed 46 billion years ago	Do astronomers estimate that the Milky Way contains 200 to 400 billion stars?
the moon is earths only natural satellite	Do it has a thicker crust and far fewer maria (flat areas of basaltic rock)?
many of the lunar craters are due to volcanic eruptions	Do only an impact with a meteorite could destroy them?
the moons interior the same as earths interior the same rock and metal make up the mantle and core in the same proportions	Do uRL:?
fracking has increased rapidly in the united states in recent years	Do the amount of natural gas being extracted and used in the Untied States is increasing rapidly?
natural gas often forms with crude oil but at a lower temperature	Do the amount of natural gas being extracted and used in the Untied States is increasing rapidly?
earthquake activity has increased in locations where there is a fracking boom	Do uRL:?
fossil fuels burn much cleaner than natural gas	Do the amount of natural gas being extracted and used in the Untied States is increasing rapidly?
if we all recycle there will be enough resources for people in developing nations to have the same lifestyle as people in developed nations	Do uRL:?
soil is a resource that must be protected	Do uRL:?
individuals cant really make a difference in natural resource use	Do uRL:?
trees a renewable resource but forests are much less renewable	Do uRL:?
dark spots on neptune are storms that come and go	Do neptunes composition is that of a gas giant: (1) upper atmosphere, (2) atmo- sphere composed of hydrogen, helium and methane gas, (3) mantle of water, ammonia and methane ice, (4) core of rock and ice?
neptune produces more energy than it receives from the sun	Do neptunes composition is that of a gas giant: (1) upper atmosphere, (2) atmo- sphere composed of hydrogen, helium and methane gas, (3) mantle of water, ammonia and methane ice, (4) core of rock and ice?
neptunes mantle is made of water ammonia and methane ice	Do neptunes composition is that of a gas giant: (1) upper atmosphere, (2) atmo- sphere composed of hydrogen, helium and methane gas, (3) mantle of water, ammonia and methane ice, (4) core of rock and ice?
nitrogen gas found in the atmosphere is useful to organisms	Do (a) Nucleic acids contain nitrogen (b) Chlorophyll molecules contain nitrogen?
nitrogen can be recycled in plants and soil and does not need to return to the atmosphere as a gas	Do (a) Nucleic acids contain nitrogen (b) Chlorophyll molecules contain nitrogen?
modern fertilizers supply fixed nitrogen to the soil eliminating the need for nitrogenfixing bacteria	Do (a) Nucleic acids contain nitrogen (b) Chlorophyll molecules contain nitrogen?
most renewable resources produce little if any pollution	Do nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels such as oil and the radioactive element uranium?
renewable energy resources are used more commonly than nonrenewable energy resources	Do nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels such as oil and the radioactive element uranium?
people have been using wind and water for energy only for the past century	Do nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels such as oil and the radioactive element uranium?
the number of tiny particles allowed to hit the uranium fuel rods must be unpredictable and spontaneous	Do in the United States, a little less than 20% of electricity comes from nuclear energy?
nuclear energy is a source of electricity	Do 1)?
uranium mining is an important part of generating nuclear power	Do 1)?
the only major accident so far at a nuclear power plant was caused by an enormous earthquake and tsunami in japan	Do 1)?
incandescent light bulbs are more efficient than compact fluorescent light bulbs	Do it takes a lot of energy to build a deep drilling platform and to run it?
the net energy obtained from a resource decreases when the easy deposits of that resource have been consumed	Do it takes a lot of energy to build a deep drilling platform and to run it?
the netenergy ratio is the amount of energy in a resource with the amount of energy needed to obtain it subtracted	Do it takes a lot of energy to build a deep drilling platform and to run it?
as a society we should make choices to use energy that is more efficient	Do for example, transportation by cars and airplanes is less energy-efficient than transportation by boats and trains?
bacteria that can make food using chemicals are called chemosythetic bacteria	Do a video explaining hydrothermal vents with good footage is seen here:?
coral reefs rival rainforests in species productivity and biomass	Do a lagoon is found inside the reef?
the sea anemones are well adapted to their environments because they have strong attachments and can close during high tides	Do uRL:?
the most difficult environmental condition for an animal that lives in a tide pool is tolerating rapid shifts in salinity	Do uRL:?
it takes about 100 years for trash to move from north america to the center of the north pacific gyre	Do s, with a mass of 100 million tons?
the north pacific gyre is estimated to have a mass of 100 million tons	Do s, with a mass of 100 million tons?
in the gyre plastic is present as particles confettilike pieces and as intact trash	Do s, with a mass of 100 million tons?
the photic zone is around 200 meters in all oceans	Do what makes it so hard to live at the bottom of the ocean? The three major factors that make the deep ocean hard to inhabit are the absence of light, low temperature, and extremely high pressure?
when we no longer hear about an oil spill in the news it is because the region has been cleaned up and is back to normal	Do uRL:?
more oil enters the oceans from small leaks than from large spills	Do in this concept, well take a look at a large recent oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico?
overall the percentage of people in the world that live in abject poverty is decreasing	Do uRL:?
about 1 million of the worlds people do not have enough clean water for drinking	Do 2)?
global resources are distributed equally across the planet	Do the Green Revolution has brought enormous impacts to the planet?
basic human necessities are food clean water secure shelter and basic sanitation	Do 2)?
in the troposphere ozone is a pollutant	Do in the ozone layer in the stratosphere, ozone screens out high energy ultraviolet radiation and makes Earth habitable?
once released into the air cfcs float up to the stratosphere	Do in the ozone layer in the stratosphere, ozone screens out high energy ultraviolet radiation and makes Earth habitable?
cfcs were completely banned in 1978 and the ozone hole has since declined	Do this will be discussed more in the next concept?
shale is the rock that forms from halite and sand deposits	Do in deeper, low-energy waters, carbonate mud that later hardens into limestone is deposited?
geologists think that the paleozoic marine transgressions and regressions were caused by decreasing and increasing glaciers	Do in deeper, low-energy waters, carbonate mud that later hardens into limestone is deposited?
much of what geologists know about paleozoic marine transgressions and regressions is from what is displayed at the grand canyon	Do above those rocks are shale (4), sandstone (3), a limestone and sandstone mix (2) showing that the sea regressed and transgressed and finally limestone (1) indicating that the sea had come back in?
the continents move around on earths surface but they are always centered near the equator	Do uRL:?
the southern continents came together to form pangaea	Do geologists think they may once have been higher than the Himalayas are now?
pangaea was central to alfred wegeners continental drift hypothesis	Do uRL:?
geologists think that the himalayas are the tallest mountains in earth history	Do geologists think they may once have been higher than the Himalayas are now?
in a car engine gasoline burns to become gases which expand when heated and move pistons to power the car	Do uRL:?
the united states produces about onehalf as much oil as it uses	Do oil is currently the single largest source of energy in the world?
the closer two adjacent planets are from the sun the farther the distance from one planets orbit to the other	Do the upper right shows the outer planets and the Kuiper belt?
mars has the smallest orbit in our solar system	Do the upper right shows the outer planets and the Kuiper belt?
if the asteroid belt is a planet that didnt come together we would expect the asteroids to be the right orbital distance between mars and jupiter	Do the upper right shows the outer planets and the Kuiper belt?
scientists now must know exactly where a planet is and will be in the future if they are going to send spacecraft to see it	Do the upper right shows the outer planets and the Kuiper belt?
through his telescope galileo could see all the planets of the solar system	Do 81 Earths diameter?
one astronomical unit is 93 million miles	Do uRL:?
every lake you see was formed naturally	Do uRL:?
lakes formed in canada were from glaciers that covered north america in the last ice age	Do like lakes, ponds are bordered by hills or low rises so the water is blocked from flowing directly downhill?
lakes are not like the ocean because they are made of fresh water and they do not have tides or currents	Do like lakes, ponds are bordered by hills or low rises so the water is blocked from flowing directly downhill?
besides changes in births and deaths immigration in or out of a region can also change a population	Do if this occurs, the population will then decrease in size?
for a given species in a given habitat the limiting factor is always the same thing	Do if this occurs, the population will then decrease in size?
a limiting factor determines the carrying capacity for a species	Do if this occurs, the population will then decrease in size?
the presence of zircons in ancient rocks indicates that there was water in the environment	Do 3)?
earth has not cooled since right after the moon formed because of radioactivity	Do still, about half the internal heat that was generated when Earth formed remains in the planet and is the source of the heat in the core and mantle today?
the breakup of rodinia may have triggered snowball earth	Do the breakup of Rodinia may have triggered Snowball Earth around 700 million years ago?
only about 25 of the continental landmass present today was part of rodinia	Do the breakup of Rodinia may have triggered Snowball Earth around 700 million years ago?
the supercontinent rodinia contained all of the continents on earth before 2 billion years ago	Do the breakup of Rodinia may have triggered Snowball Earth around 700 million years ago?
the supercontinent of rodinia was complete when laurentia collided with rodinia	Do the breakup of Rodinia may have triggered Snowball Earth around 700 million years ago?
the government must oversee the superfund act because bo other organization is big enough to direct large corporations	Do uRL:?
it is okay to dispose hazardous material down the drain	Do uRL:?
new york michigan and california are the only locations of superfund sites	Do uRL:?
it is easier and cheaper to clean up a toxic waste site than to prevent the site from being contaminated in the first place	Do uRL:?
some volcanic rock types are laid down horizontally	Do this deformation produces geologic structures such as folds, joints, and faults that are caused by stresses?
sedimentary rocks are useful for deciphering the geological history of an area	Do uRL:?
the rocks at the bottom of the grand canyon do not have layers they are sedimentary rocks that were laid down vertically	Do uRL:?
fossils found in the top layer of sedimentary rocks are the oldest	Do uRL:?
ripple marks are caused by sand slumping down a dune face	Do uRL:?
without the principle of uniformitarianism geologists could not understand earth history	Do what would cause sandstone to have layers that cross each other, a feature called cross-bedding?
navajo sandstone formed from volcanic eruptions	Do but we can make observations now and apply them to this rock that formed long ago?
if crossbedded sandstone forms in dunes today it probably formed in dunes in the ancient past	Do uRL:?
the idea that the present is the key to the past is called the principle of geology	Do what would cause sandstone to have layers that cross each other, a feature called cross-bedding?
according to nicholas steno if a rock at the top of a mountain contains fossils of marine animals that rock formed in the sea and was uplifted into a mountain	Do (c) Superposition?
fossils of human ancestors have been found with dinosaur fossils	Do if an igneous dike (B) cuts a series of metamorphic rocks (A), which is older and which is younger? In this image, A must have existed first for B to cut across it?
feathered dinosaurs preceded birds in the fossil record	Do if an igneous dike (B) cuts a series of metamorphic rocks (A), which is older and which is younger? In this image, A must have existed first for B to cut across it?
the only reason plants can grow in arid regions is that there is a lot of water trapped in the soil	Do 3), a process known as transpiration?
water can be stored for future use in snow and ice	Do most of Earths water is stored in the oceans, where it can remain for hundreds or thousands of years?
as far back as the roman empire humans diverted water to suit their own needs	Do uRL:?
some water is purified enough for spreading on grass and some water is purified enough for drinking	Do uRL:?
repairing automobile or boat engine leaks right away helps to protect water	Do uRL:?
when you take your dog to the park you should leave its waste in place to act as fertilizer for nearby plants	Do uRL:?
keeping pollutants from getting into the water system is better than cleaning the water up after it is polluted	Do clean water that is already polluted?
a half life is the time it takes for half of the parent isotopes to change into daughter isotopes	Do 1)?
a radioactive isotope pair is only useful for as long as there is enough daughter to be able to count	Do first, we need to know about radioactive decay?
radiometric dating uses the rate of decay of unstable isotopes to calculate the absolute ages of fossils and rocks	Do using more than one isotope helps scientists to check the accuracy of the ages that they calculate?
carbon14 decays to carbon12 with a halflife of 5730 years	Do carbon isotopes from the black material in these cave paintings places their cre- ating at about 26,000 to 27,000 years BP (before present)?
potassiumargon and uraniumlead dating are useful for very young materials	Do using more than one isotope helps scientists to check the accuracy of the ages that they calculate?
uraniumlead has been used to calculate the ages of zircon crystals that are 44 billion years old	Do 4 billion years old, among the oldest rocks on the planet?
plugin hybrids run for a longer time on electricity than regular hybrids	Do but developing fuel-cell technology has had many problems and no one knows when or if they will become practical?
the six major pollutants have decreased by more than 50 since the clean air act of 1970 was implemented	Do there is still much work to be done to continue to clean up the air?
the ozone hole will be back to its pre1980 levels in one to two centuries	Do the ozone layer will reach the same levels it had before 1980 around 2068 and 1950 levels in one or two centuries?
wealthier nations have donated money to develop technologies that will replace ozone destroying chemicals	Do the ozone layer will reach the same levels it had before 1980 around 2068 and 1950 levels in one or two centuries?
the suns gravitational pull keeps the planets in orbit	Do uRL:?
the planets appear to move slower than the stars	Do ptolemys version of the geocentric model worked so well that it remained the accepted model of the universe for more than a thousand years?
ptolomys system worked so well that no one questioned it until the 20th century	Do lets explore the evolution of the idea that Earth orbits the Sun?
copernicus proposed that the planets orbit the sun the heliocentric model	Do uRL:?
a rock made of grains that are so tiny they cannot be seen without a microscope is a rock but it is not made of minerals	Do uRL:?
not all rocks contain grains that fit the definition of a mineral	Do uRL:?
all rocks and rock types are part of the rock cycle	Do the key processes of the rock cycle are crystallization, erosion and sedimentation, and metamorphism?
rocks are classified into four major groups reflecting how they formed intrusive extrusive metamorphic and sedimentary	Do uRL:?
in crystallization slower cooling forms smaller crystals	Do slow cooling produces larger crystals?
a rock transforms from one type to another by the processes of the rock cycle but once it is transformed it is out of the rock cycle	Do the key processes of the rock cycle are crystallization, erosion and sedimentation, and metamorphism?
the sun appears to move across the sky from west to east each day	Do uRL:?
a molecule at the equator rotates extremely fast but a molecule at the south pole barely moves at all	Do at the Equator, the Earth rotates at a speed of about 1,700 km per hour, but at the poles the movement speed is nearly nothing?
the direction that the stars appear to move across the sky is due to earths rotation	Do uRL:?
in many nations diseases carried in drinking water are the leading cause of death for children under the age of five	Do uRL:?
dracunculiasis spreads when people drink adult guinea worms	Do toxic chemicals and radiological hazards in water can also cause diseases?
the solution to stopping the spread of waterborne diseases is always large expensive public work projects	Do uRL:?
people in developed nations dont think much about waterborne diseases because our water is treated and is almost always safe to drink	Do toxic chemicals and radiological hazards in water can also cause diseases?
for every action there is an equal and opposite reaction also known as thrust	Do nothing would get into space without being thrust upward by a rocket?
if you could find a bathtub big enough you could put enough water to float saturn in it	Do this image of Saturn and its rings is a composite of pictures taken by the Cassini orbiter in 2008?
saturns rings are connected to the planet	Do the rings were likely formed by the breakup of one of Saturns moons or from material that never accreted into the planet when Saturn originally formed?
saturns atmosphere is just as stormy s jupiters	Do uRL:?
scientists are certain that saturns rings formed when one if its moons broke apart	Do the rings were likely formed by the breakup of one of Saturns moons or from material that never accreted into the planet when Saturn originally formed?
models can be used to make predictions	Do but the more computing power that goes into the model and the care with which the scientists construct the model can increase the chances that a model will be accurate?
a map of the entire world is an accurate physical model	Do but the more computing power that goes into the model and the care with which the scientists construct the model can increase the chances that a model will be accurate?
computers that use mathematical models to predict the weather are always accurate	Do but the more computing power that goes into the model and the care with which the scientists construct the model can increase the chances that a model will be accurate?
older crust is hot and more buoyant than younger crust	Do uRL:?
the rock made underwater from cooled lava is basalt	Do as the seafloor they sat on moved away from the ridge, the crust on which they sat become less buoyant and the guyots moved deeper beneath sea level?
during the summer we experience shorter days and longer nights	Do more about seasons can be found in the Atmospheric Processes chapter?
earths axis of rotation is pointed toward polaris the north star in the summer but away from polar in the winter	Do as the Earth orbits the Sun, the tilt of Earths axis stays lined up with the North Star?
the vernal equinox happens around september 22 or 23	Do uRL:?
all salt is dangerous for humans and we should eat only a tiny amount each day	Do because of the increased salinity, the wa- ter in the Dead Sea is very dense, it has such high salinity that people can easily float in it!?
chlorine is the most abundant cation in seawater	Do uRL:?
biochemical sedimentary rocks from in oceans or salt lakes	Do uRL:?
rock salt is a clastic rock	Do uRL:?
darker sediments form when the environment is oxygen rich	Do uRL:?
organic materials are made from the remains of onceliving organisms	Do uRL:?
erosion is the process in which sediments are removed and transported by water wind ice or gravity	Do uRL:?
chemical precipitates are made by fragments of other worn down rocks	Do uRL:?
scientists can learn most everything about earths interior by studying the waves that come into one seismograph	Do two types of seismic waves are most useful for learning about Earths interior?
pwaves speed up at the mantle core boundary	Do s-waves disappear at the mantle core boundary, so we know the outer core is liquid?
in a normal year the peru current carries cold water north along south america and then across the equator	Do upwelling brings cold, nutrient-rich waters from the deep sea?
the north atlantic oscillation mostly alters climate in europe	Do uRL:?
warm water in the western pacific ocean decreases sea levels	Do upwelling brings cold, nutrient-rich waters from the deep sea?
el nio and la nia make a cycle called the los nios oscillation	Do the ENSO drives changes in climate that are felt around the world about every two to seven years?
sensors can detect wavelengths of energy we cant see and convert them to visible light	Do about 44% of solar radiation is in the visible light wavelengths, but the Sun also emits infrared, ultraviolet, and other wavelengths?
a shorter wavelength means the wave has less energy	Do about 44% of solar radiation is in the visible light wavelengths, but the Sun also emits infrared, ultraviolet, and other wavelengths?
the only wavelength of energy that are filtered by the atmosphere are uv waves	Do uVA: the lowest energy, travels through the atmosphere to the ground?
the southwestern us is a hotspot for solar energy because the region receives a lot of sunlight	Do the light carries the energy through the empty space between the Sun and the Earth as radiation?
in the future cars may be able to run on solar energy	Do the light carries the energy through the empty space between the Sun and the Earth as radiation?
orions belt consists of stars that are different colors	Do 1)?
the brighter the star the larger it is	Do 1)?
the brightest stars are more than 10000 times brighter than the sun	Do 1)?
stars in a constellation appear close together but most are not at all close together in space	Do uRL:?
babylonian astronomers created the zodiac to explain natural phenomena that we can now explain with science	Do stars differ in size, temperature, and age, but they all appear to be made up of the same elements and to behave according to the same principles?
the alignment of stars in the sky particularly the patterns of the constellations when a person is born affects events on earth	Do uRL:?
when an idea in astrology fails it is altered or abandoned to fit the new data	Do uRL:?
only a few stars are made of hydrogen and helium most are made of heavier elements	Do the energy source for all stars is nuclear fusion?
there is only one particle accelerator for scientists to use	Do uRL:?
the core of a star like the sun is so hot that nuclear fusion takes place	Do the energy source for all stars is nuclear fusion?
the sun produces more energy than most stars	Do the energy source for all stars is nuclear fusion?
all three phases of water can be present in a single location	Do uRL:?
earth is not the only planet that has water in all three states and water is the only substance that is found on earth in all three states	Do uRL:?
there is a lot of mixing between the stratosphere and troposphere	Do once in the stratosphere, it remains suspended there for many years because there is so little mixing between the two layers?
during a volcanic eruption ash and gas may burst into the stratosphere and may remain suspended for many years	Do once in the stratosphere, it remains suspended there for many years because there is so little mixing between the two layers?
a stream only has one source	Do the mix of fresh and salt water where a river runs into the ocean creates a diversity of environments where many different types of organisms create unique ecosystems?
in the united states water that falls on the west side of the continental divide flows into the pacific ocean and on the east side to the atlantic ocean	Do can you locate where in the map of North America this peak sits?
organisms cannot live where a fresh water stream flows into the salty ocean	Do the mix of fresh and salt water where a river runs into the ocean creates a diversity of environments where many different types of organisms create unique ecosystems?
supervolcanoes can cause mass extinctions	Do uRL:?
supervolcano eruptions happen somewhere on earth about every 1000 years	Do not surprisingly, supervolcanoes are the most dangerous type of volcano?
yellowstone is a supervolcano that has had three massive eruptions	Do the caldera at Santorini in Greece is so large that it can only be seen by satellite?
prominences can last lengths of time ranging from days to months	Do sDO sees the entire disk of the Sun in extremely high spatial and temporal resolution, allowing scientists to zoom in on notable events such as flares, waves, and sunspots?
earth is too far away to be affected by solar flares	Do (b) A close-up of a sunspot taken in ultraviolet light?
spacecraft and astronauts can be harmed by radiation in space	Do (b) A close-up of a sunspot taken in ultraviolet light?
for a more sustainable future human population should be reduced	Do uRL:?
in order to create a more sustainable environment we need to use resources faster than they are regenerated	Do uRL:?
sustainable development is only concerned with protecting the environment	Do uRL:?
to help society become more sustainable every individual should consume less and think about the impacts of what they consume	Do uRL:?
one of the reasons for the increase in carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is due to the increase in the amount of fossil fuels used	Do uRL:?
data are facts that have been uncovered from the scientific literature or by systematic observations or experiments	Do we can discard Hypothesis 1?
having multiple working hypotheses helps in investigating a question	Do we can discard Hypothesis 1?
perhaps the most important feature of the outermost layers of the atmosphere is the low density of the gas particles	Do the solar wind is made of high-speed particles, mostly protons and electrons, traveling rapidly outward from the Sun?
the aurora occur during massive solar storms when the van allen belts are overloaded with particles	Do uRL:?
when two water bulges on opposite sides of the earth aligned with the moon they are called low tides	Do the gravitational attraction of the Moon to ocean water creates the high and low tides?
there is only one high and one low tide a day	Do water appears to move a greater distance on a gentle slope than on a steep slope?
tides like other waves are additive	Do uRL:?
tree trunks alternating bands of lightcolored high density summer growth and lowdensity winter growth	Do the tree-ring record is extremely useful for finding the age of ancient structures?
ice cores show that snow falls in winter but in summer dust accumulates	Do the longest cores allow scientists to create a record of polar climate stretching back hundreds of thousands of years?
a cold year is indicated in a varve by a thick deposit of sediment	Do a warm summer might result in a very thick sediment layer while a cooler summer might yield a thinner layer?
an ice core can reveal the climate in the region for hundreds of thousands of years	Do the longest cores allow scientists to create a record of polar climate stretching back hundreds of thousands of years?
inversions are very stable and may last for several days or even weeks	Do uRL:?
air from the troposphere and stratosphere commonly mix	Do uRL:?
a ship at sea will probably not know when a tsunami passes beneath it	Do fortunately, few undersea earthquakes, and even fewer meteorite impacts, generate tsunami?
tsunami have high wave heights and short wavelengths	Do tsunami can travel at speeds of 800 kilometers per hour (500 miles per hour)?
tsunami warnings have been placed where tsunamis are possible	Do fortunately, few undersea earthquakes, and even fewer meteorite impacts, generate tsunami?
you would be more likely to drown in a tsunami in a flat region than on a steep beach because the wave could travel farther inland and you couldnt outrun it	Do tsunami can travel at speeds of 800 kilometers per hour (500 miles per hour)?
dust is a natural air pollutant that is increased by human activities	Do particulates from a brush fire give the sky a strange glow in Arizona?
all air pollutants except particulates are brownish gases	Do the two types of air pollutants are primary pollutants, which enter the atmosphere directly, and secondary pollutants, which form from a chemical reaction?
secondary pollutants are most common in warm arid cities surrounded by mountains	Do the two types of air pollutants are primary pollutants, which enter the atmosphere directly, and secondary pollutants, which form from a chemical reaction?
permineralization is the most common method of fossilization	Do fossil dinosaur bones, petrified wood, and many marine fossils were formed by permineralization?
a large mammal fossil that is complete must have formed in exceptional circumstances	Do fossil dinosaur bones, petrified wood, and many marine fossils were formed by permineralization?
there are many fossils of bacteria and jellyfish	Do 1):?
galileos telescope revealed galaxies that were not visible with the naked eye	Do uRL:?
during the time of galileo most people thought that earth was the center of the universe	Do the universe includes all of space and time?
astronomers think that the universe contains about 100 billion galaxies	Do the universe includes all of space and time?
if your grandfather is 73 years old he has been alive for one year on uranus	Do scientists think that Uranus was probably knocked over by a collision with another planet-sized object billions of years ago?
gravity is stronger on uranus than earth	Do gravity at the surface of Uranus is weaker than on Earths surface, so if you were at the top of the clouds on Uranus, you would weigh about 10% less than what you weigh on Earth?
uranus may have been hit by struck by an enormous object billions of years ago	Do scientists think that Uranus was probably knocked over by a collision with another planet-sized object billions of years ago?
industrial water use includes using water for cooling but not using up the water	Do manufacturing is also water intensive?
aquaculture of some species provides a lot of food value at little environmental cost	Do mangrove forests, salt flats, and salt marshes have been converted to shrimp farms?
scientists could learn a lot about the surface of venus through telescopes since the planet is so close	Do the dense atmosphere totally obscures the surface of Venus, even from spacecraft orbiting the planet?
venus has extremely high atmospheric pressure and an intense greenhouse effect	Do diagram of Venuss interior, which is simi- lar to Earths?
venus is the 2nd hottest planet in the solar system after mercury	Do the dense atmosphere totally obscures the surface of Venus, even from spacecraft orbiting the planet?
the central valley of california is a lush agricultural area because it receives a lot of rain	Do uRL:?
a change in temperature and precipitation would completely change the types of plants and animals in a region	Do a change in temperature and precipitation would completely change the types of plants and animals that can live successfully in that region?
some regions receive a considerable amount of rain but have an annual drought of several months each year	Do a change in temperature and precipitation would completely change the types of plants and animals that can live successfully in that region?
water disputes are easily solved using the helsinki rules	Do this is projected to get worse as demand increases?
in some underdeveloped countries raw sewage is dumped into the same water where people drink and bathe	Do in developed countries, the three main sources of water pollution are described below?
water pollution is not a problem in developed nations	Do in developed countries, the three main sources of water pollution are described below?
in the united states sewage that enters water bodies is always decontaminated and cleaned up	Do in developed countries, the three main sources of water pollution are described below?
weathering happens rapidly often in a matter of years or decades	Do uRL:?
the appalachians were once as tall as the himalayas and have since weathered and eroded	Do the Appalachian Mountains along the east coast of North America were once as tall as the Himalayas?
weathering and erosion can change land over time	Do the Appalachian Mountains along the east coast of North America were once as tall as the Himalayas?
weathering can change roads sidewalks buildings and sculptures over time	Do uRL:?
many of the best scientists of the day agreed with wegeners hypothesis even though he did not have a plausible mechanism for continental movement	Do he called his hypothesis continental drift?
the heat source for plate motions is the mantle	Do uRL:?
where two adjacent convection cells rise to the surface a continent could break apart and the pieces could move in the opposite direction	Do uRL:?
the hypothesis of continental drift was ignored until new evidence was found that pointed to a mechanism	Do he called his hypothesis continental drift?
waves break when they become too tall to be supported by their base	Do the crest falls over and crashes down?
wave energy is lowest at the surface and increases with depth	Do "B" shows that molecules in shallow water travel in an elliptical path because of the ocean bottom?
the energy contained in bottom of the wave is reduced due to friction with the shore	Do the crest falls over and crashes down?
the water in a wave travels across the ocean to end up on a shoreline	Do this concept studies the most familiar waves, those on the oceans surface?
the microscope was invented in the late 1800s	Do their simple microscope could make small objects appear nine times bigger than they really were?
the earliest microscopes were light microscopes	Do he called them animalcules?
an individual bacterial cell is invisible without a microscope	Do you can get a glimpse of that world in Figure 1.10?
many life science discoveries would not have been possible without the microscope	Do you can get a glimpse of that world in Figure 1.10?
an electron microscope magnifies objects up to 2 billion times larger than their actual size	Do their simple microscope could make small objects appear nine times bigger than they really were?
the first microscope was made by anton van leeuwenhoek	Do he called them animalcules?
the jansens discovered that one lens magnified objects more than several lenses	Do their simple microscope could make small objects appear nine times bigger than they really were?
the cell theory depended on the discovery of the microscope	Do you can get a glimpse of that world in Figure 1.10?
only light of certain wavelengths is visible to the human eye	Do you can get a glimpse of that world in Figure 1.10?
the jansens microscopes were stronger than van leeuwenhoeks microscopes	Do he called them animalcules?
electron microscopes are more powerful than light microscopes	Do an electron microscope was used to make the image of the ant head in Figure 1.10?
light microscopes are no longer used today	Do he called them animalcules?
first scientist to observe bacteria with a microscope	Do hooke was the first person to observe the cells from a once-living organism?
microscopic building block of all living things	Do hooke was the first person to observe the cells from a once-living organism?
scientist who discovered cells	Do hooke was the first person to observe the cells from a once-living organism?
type of microscope that uses lenses to refract visible light	Do their simple microscope could make small objects appear nine times bigger than they really were?
general term for an instrument that makes magnified images of very small objects	Do their simple microscope could make small objects appear nine times bigger than they really were?
name associated with the invention of the microscope	Do you can get a glimpse of that world in Figure 1.10?
type of microscope that passes electrons over or through objects	Do their simple microscope could make small objects appear nine times bigger than they really were?
most flatworm species have separate sexes	Do some are only about a millimeter in length?
when flatworms reproduce eggs are fertilized outside the body	Do then the life cycle repeats?
flatworms can eat digest food and eliminate wastes all at the same time	Do this provides a counterforce for the contraction of muscles, allowing roundworms to move easily over surfaces?
freeliving roundworms may feed on bacteria fungi or protozoa	Do uRL:?
roundworms play an important role in the carbon cycle	Do then the life cycle repeats?
all flatworms are several meters long	Do some are only about a millimeter in length?
flatworms have a concentration of nerve tissue in the head end	Do some are only about a millimeter in length?
flatworms may have several different larval stages	Do then the life cycle repeats?
a parasitic flatworm usually needs more than one type of host to complete its life cycle	Do usually, more than one type of host is needed to complete the parasites life cycle, as shown in Figure 12.12?
phylum nematoda has less than 800 known species	Do you can see an example of a roundworm in Figure 12.13?
the body of a roundworm has a tough covering of cuticle	Do this provides a counterforce for the contraction of muscles, allowing roundworms to move easily over surfaces?
all parasitic roundworms have vertebrate hosts	Do usually, more than one type of host is needed to complete the parasites life cycle, as shown in Figure 12.12?
name of the phylum to which roundworms belong	Do some are only about a millimeter in length?
common name for the type of worm that has a pseudocoelom	Do usually, more than one type of host is needed to complete the parasites life cycle, as shown in Figure 12.12?
parasitic roundworm with special structures for attaching to the hosts intestines	Do you can see an example of a roundworm in Figure 12.13?
common name for the type of worm that lacks a pseudocoelom	Do usually, more than one type of host is needed to complete the parasites life cycle, as shown in Figure 12.12?
example of a flatworm that is a human parasite	Do some are only about a millimeter in length?
name of the phylum to which flatworms belong	Do some are only about a millimeter in length?
largest and most common parasitic worm in humans	Do uRL:?
special tissue on the outer surface of a mollusk that secretes a shell	Do you can see the radula of the sea slug in Figure 12.17?
type of annelid that feeds off the blood of a vertebrate host	Do 19 is a polychaete that has a fan-like crown of tentacles for filter feeding?
mollusk feeding organ with teeth	Do these include a: circulatory system; excretory system; complete digestive system; and nervous system, with a brain and sensory organs?
name of the phylum to which snails belong	Do uRL:?
type of annelid that lives on the ocean floor	Do 19 is a polychaete that has a fan-like crown of tentacles for filter feeding?
name of the phylum to which earthworms belong	Do uRL:?
trait found in annelids but not in roundworms	Do these include a: circulatory system; excretory system; complete digestive system; and nervous system, with a brain and sensory organs?
some mollusks are so small that they are nearly microscopic	Do uRL:?
the head of a mollusk may have tentacles for sensing the environment	Do for example, they might have tentacles for sensing or feeding, paddles for swimming, or suckers for clinging to surfaces?
all mollusks are freeliving heterotrophs	Do mollusks are also eaten by many other organisms, including humans?
there are more than a million known species of annelids	Do other species grow to adult size without going through a larval stage?
annelids can reproduce only sexually	Do other species grow to adult size without going through a larval stage?
there are more than 100000 known species of mollusks	Do each one is different from the adult stage?
the largest mollusk is about as big as a human adults fist	Do uRL:?
a mollusk has a heart that pumps blood	Do you can see the radula of the sea slug in Figure 12.17?
the majority of mollusks live in moist soil	Do mollusks are also eaten by many other organisms, including humans?
annelids may have tentacles that they use for sensing or feeding	Do for example, they might have tentacles for sensing or feeding, paddles for swimming, or suckers for clinging to surfaces?
annelids have a large coelom	Do these include a: circulatory system; excretory system; complete digestive system; and nervous system, with a brain and sensory organs?
some annelids are filter feeders	Do 19 is a polychaete that has a fan-like crown of tentacles for filter feeding?
amphibians were the first vertebrates that did not need water to reproduce	Do the earliest birds evolved about 150 million years ago?
vertebrates evolved endothermy before they evolved ectothermy	Do 4 summarizes how vertebrates evolved from that time forward?
amphibians evolved from a lobefinned fish ancestor	Do the earliest birds evolved about 150 million years ago?
all animals in phylum chordata are vertebrates	Do what traits do vertebrates have that set them apart from invertebrate chordates?
the function of vertebrate kidneys is filtering wastes out of the blood	Do the majority of vertebrates have: scales, feathers, fur, or hair covering their skin; muscles attached to the endoskeleton to allow movement; a circulatory system with a heart that pumps blood through a closed network of blood vessels; an excretory system that includes a pair of kidneys for filtering wastes out of the blood; a central nervous system with a brain, spinal cord, and nerve fibers throughout the body; an adaptive immune system that learns to recognize specific pathogens and launch tailor-made attacks against them; and an endocrine system with glands that secrete chemical messenger molecules called hormones?
the adaptive immune system of vertebrates learns to recognize and attack specific pathogens	Do the majority of vertebrates have: scales, feathers, fur, or hair covering their skin; muscles attached to the endoskeleton to allow movement; a circulatory system with a heart that pumps blood through a closed network of blood vessels; an excretory system that includes a pair of kidneys for filtering wastes out of the blood; a central nervous system with a brain, spinal cord, and nerve fibers throughout the body; an adaptive immune system that learns to recognize specific pathogens and launch tailor-made attacks against them; and an endocrine system with glands that secrete chemical messenger molecules called hormones?
the earliest fish had a cartilage endoskeleton	Do early bony fish evolved into modern ray-finned fish and lobe-finned fish?
birds evolved before the first mammals appeared	Do the earliest birds evolved about 150 million years ago?
an animal with a cartilage skeleton can grow larger than an animal with a bony skeleton	Do bone also provides more protection for soft tissues and internal organs?
there are more than a million living species of vertebrates	Do 4 summarizes how vertebrates evolved from that time forward?
living species of vertebrates are placed in five different classes	Do 4 summarizes how vertebrates evolved from that time forward?
most vertebrates have separate male and female sexes	Do this reproductive strategy occurs in almost all mammals including humans?
development of an embryo in an egg outside the mothers body	Do this reproductive strategy occurs in almost all mammals including humans?
use of behavior to control body temperature from the outside	Do you can learn more about how vertebrates regulate their temperature by watching this video:?
reproductive strategy that occurs in almost all mammals	Do this reproductive strategy occurs in almost all mammals including humans?
tough flexible tissue that contains collagen	Do bone also provides more protection for soft tissues and internal organs?
use of biology to control body temperature from the inside	Do you can learn more about how vertebrates regulate their temperature by watching this video:?
hard tissue that contains minerals in a collagen framework	Do bone also provides more protection for soft tissues and internal organs?
development of an embryo in an egg inside the mothers body	Do this reproductive strategy occurs in almost all mammals including humans?
fish have a circulatory system with a heart	Do they share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water?
fish can see and hear but they cant smell or taste	Do they include organs to see, hear, feel, smell, and taste?
a fish embryo develops in an egg inside the mothers body	Do the embryo develops in an egg outside the mothers body?
mouth brooding refers to a form of predation in some species of fish	Do they share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water?
fish have a nervous system with a brain	Do they share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water?
almost all fish have internal fertilization of gametes	Do they share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water?
there are about 28000 living species of fish	Do they share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water?
most fish parents provide care to their offspring	Do they share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water?
hagfish have a backbone but lack a cranium	Do example puffer lungfish?
bony fish include rayfinned fish and lobefinned fish	Do they share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water?
fish larvae look like miniature versions of the adults	Do they must go through metamorphosis to change into the adult form?
rayfinned fish make up the majority of living fish species	Do they share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water?
inflatable fish organ that allows a fish to rise or sink in the water	Do they share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water?
common reproductive behavior in fish	Do they share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water?
fish organ that functions like a paddle or rudder	Do they share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water?
most primitive class of fish	Do they share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water?
fish organ that absorbs oxygen from water	Do they share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water?
fish class that includes sharks	Do they share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water?
rayfinned or lobefinned fish	Do they share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water?
type of tissue that includes bone and cartilage	Do 4 shows six of them and gives their functions?
structure composed of two or more types of tissues that work together to do the same task	Do 3 shows how all four tissue types work together to make the heart pump blood?
type of tissue that consists of cells that can contract	Do human cells are organized into tissues, tissues are organized into organs, and organs are organized into organ systems?
one of the basic building blocks of the human body	Do human cells are organized into tissues, tissues are organized into organs, and organs are organized into organ systems?
type of tissue that can send and receive electrical messages	Do nervous tissue makes up the brain, spinal cord, and other nerves that run throughout the body?
any group of specialized cells of the same type that perform the same function	Do human cells are organized into tissues, tissues are organized into organs, and organs are organized into organ systems?
type of tissue that covers inner and outer body surfaces	Do nervous tissue makes up the brain, spinal cord, and other nerves that run throughout the body?
the basic units of structure and function of the human body are organs	Do human cells are organized into tissues, tissues are organized into organs, and organs are organized into organ systems?
most human cells are specialized for specific functions	Do human cells are organized into tissues, tissues are organized into organs, and organs are organized into organ systems?
a tissue consists of four basic types of cells	Do human cells are organized into tissues, tissues are organized into organs, and organs are organized into organ systems?
the heart is an organ in the circulatory system	Do 4 shows six of them and gives their functions?
the average human adult consists of about a billion cells	Do uRL:?
each cell of the body carries out basic life processes	Do human cells are organized into tissues, tissues are organized into organs, and organs are organized into organ systems?
most human cells have specialized functions	Do human cells are organized into tissues, tissues are organized into organs, and organs are organized into organ systems?
there are a total of five basic types of human tissues	Do human cells are organized into tissues, tissues are organized into organs, and organs are organized into organ systems?
the skin consists mainly of muscle tissue	Do 3 shows how all four tissue types work together to make the heart pump blood?
neurons are cells that can send and receive electrical messages	Do human cells are organized into tissues, tissues are organized into organs, and organs are organized into organ systems?
smooth muscle tissue is found in the heart	Do nervous tissue makes up the brain, spinal cord, and other nerves that run throughout the body?
connective tissues are found in the walls of blood vessels	Do 4 shows six of them and gives their functions?
the human skin is about 2 centimeters thick	Do however, like the skin, the hair and nails also play important roles in helping the body maintain homeostasis?
all the cells on the surface of the epidermis are dead	Do they also make it easier to feel things with the sensitive fingertips by acting as a counterforce when things are handled?
people with light skin have fewer melanocytes per square inch than people with dark skin	Do however, like the skin, the hair and nails also play important roles in helping the body maintain homeostasis?
the production of melanin in the skin is stimulated by exposure to ultraviolet light	Do however, like the skin, the hair and nails also play important roles in helping the body maintain homeostasis?
the function of sebum is to waterproof the hair and skin	Do however, like the skin, the hair and nails also play important roles in helping the body maintain homeostasis?
the skin helps maintain homeostasis by regulating body temperature	Do however, like the skin, the hair and nails also play important roles in helping the body maintain homeostasis?
sweat contains only water and salt	Do refer to the figure as you read about the epidermis and dermis below?
the main cause of acne is eating greasy foods	Do this reduces the amount of heat that reaches the surface so less heat is lost to the environment?
when blood vessels in the skin dilate more heat reaches the body surface	Do this reduces the amount of heat that reaches the surface so less heat is lost to the environment?
skin damaged by ultraviolet light is at greater risk of developing cancer	Do over-the-counter products or prescription drugs may be needed if the problem is serious or doesnt clear up on its own?
hair grows longer because it is made up of living cells	Do however, like the skin, the hair and nails also play important roles in helping the body maintain homeostasis?
sweat reaches the surface of the skin by traveling through hair follicles	Do however, like the skin, the hair and nails also play important roles in helping the body maintain homeostasis?
outer layer of the skin	Do however, like the skin, the hair and nails also play important roles in helping the body maintain homeostasis?
tough protein that fills hair cells	Do they also make it easier to feel things with the sensitive fingertips by acting as a counterforce when things are handled?
skin structure where a hair originates	Do however, like the skin, the hair and nails also play important roles in helping the body maintain homeostasis?
major organ of the integumentary system	Do refer to the figure as you read about the epidermis and dermis below?
oily substance secreted by glands in the skin	Do however, like the skin, the hair and nails also play important roles in helping the body maintain homeostasis?
inner layer of the skin	Do however, like the skin, the hair and nails also play important roles in helping the body maintain homeostasis?
type of cell that produces a brown pigment in skin	Do however, like the skin, the hair and nails also play important roles in helping the body maintain homeostasis?
bones release stored calcium to the blood as needed	Do they consist of living tissues and are supplied with blood and nerves?
bones are like chalk dead dry and brittle	Do they consist of living tissues and are supplied with blood and nerves?
bones are organs made up of four types of bone tissues	Do they consist of living tissues and are supplied with blood and nerves?
compact bone lies between spongy bone and periosteum	Do bone marrow makes blood cells?
an example of a ballandsocket joint is the elbow	Do move these three joints in your own skeleton to experience the range of motion each allows?
calcium and vitamin d are needed to keep bones strong	Do if you dont get enough calcium and vitamin D in your diet as a teen, you will be more likely to develop osteoporosis when you are older?
blood cells are produced by compact bone	Do bone marrow makes blood cells?
people with osteoporosis have an increased risk of bone fractures	Do maximizing the calcium in your bones while youre young will reduce your risk of developing osteoporosis later in of life?
by birth the human skeleton consists entirely of bone	Do weight-bearing activities such as weight lifting can increase growth in bone width?
bones grow thicker when they are put under stress by muscles	Do weight-bearing activities such as weight lifting can increase growth in bone width?
a sprain occurs when a bone bends but doesnt break	Do the healing process usually takes several weeks or even months?
the adult skeletal system contains 206 bones	Do ligaments connect bones of the skeleton and hold them together?
type of bone tissue that contains many tiny pores	Do bone marrow makes blood cells?
tough fibrous tissue that forms the outer layer of bone	Do bone marrow makes blood cells?
type of bone tissue that is very dense and hard	Do bone marrow makes blood cells?
band of fibrous tissue that holds bones together	Do ligaments connect bones of the skeleton and hold them together?
soft tissue inside spongy bone that makes blood cells	Do bone marrow makes blood cells?
tough flexible connective tissue containing collagen	Do ligaments connect bones of the skeleton and hold them together?
process in which cartilage changes to bone	Do weight-bearing activities such as weight lifting can increase growth in bone width?
organelle that allows muscles to contract	Do a few of the larger muscles are labeled in the figure?
muscle found in the walls of internal organs except the heart	Do you can read more about them below?
tough connective tissue that attaches muscle to bone	Do when the muscles contract, they pull on the bones, causing them to move?
long thin muscle cell	Do muscle contractions are responsible for virtually all the movements of the body, both inside and out?
muscle found in the walls of the heart	Do one way to warm up is to jog slowly for a few minutes?
protein filament that slides over another when a muscle contracts	Do when the triceps muscle contracts, it straightens the arm?
most common type of muscle in the body	Do one way to warm up is to jog slowly for a few minutes?
the human heart is composed almost completely of muscle	Do muscle contractions are responsible for virtually all the movements of the body, both inside and out?
when a muscle contracts it gets longer	Do when the triceps muscle contracts, it straightens the arm?
actin filaments slide over myosin filaments when a muscle contracts	Do it causes the muscle fibers to shorten and the muscle to contract?
contractions of skeletal muscles are involuntary	Do a few of the larger muscles are labeled in the figure?
weightbearing exercises increase muscle strength	Do snowshoeing is a fun way to get aerobic exercise?
there are four different types of muscle tissues in the human body	Do when the muscles contract, they pull on the bones, causing them to move?
aerobic exercise increases muscle endurance	Do snowshoeing is a fun way to get aerobic exercise?
tendons attach one bone to another at a joint	Do when the muscles contract, they pull on the bones, causing them to move?
skeletal muscles work in pairs	Do a few of the larger muscles are labeled in the figure?
the quadriceps is a muscle in the upper arm	Do when the triceps muscle contracts, it straightens the arm?
situps and pushups increase muscle size and strength	Do snowshoeing is a fun way to get aerobic exercise?
muscle contractions are responsible for virtually all movements of the body	Do muscle contractions are responsible for virtually all the movements of the body, both inside and out?
state in which the body does not contain enough water	Do trans fat may be found in such foods as cookies, doughnuts, crackers, fried foods, ground beef, and margarine?
any nutrient the body needs in relatively small amounts	Do they include carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, and water?
chemical element needed in small amounts for normal functioning of the body	Do they include carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, and water?
artificial lipid added to foods to preserve freshness	Do trans fat may be found in such foods as cookies, doughnuts, crackers, fried foods, ground beef, and margarine?
any nutrient the body needs in relatively large amounts	Do they include carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, and water?
nutrient made up of amino acids	Do 3 shows good food sources of protein?
sugar starch or fiber	Do it also helps keep food waste moist so it can pass easily out of the body?
all nutrients provide the body with energy	Do these nutrients dont provide the body with energy, but they are still essential for good health?
your body cannot produce any of the vitamins it needs	Do these vitamins are stored by the body, so they can build up to high levels?
the mineral sodium is needed for normal muscle function	Do too much sodium has been linked to high blood pressure in some people?
vitamin k is needed for normal nerve function	Do these vitamins are stored by the body, so they can build up to high levels?
proteins can provide the body with energy	Do these nutrients dont provide the body with energy, but they are still essential for good health?
all carbohydrates provide the body with energy	Do these nutrients dont provide the body with energy, but they are still essential for good health?
fiber helps keep sugar and lipids at normal levels in the blood	Do these vitamins are stored by the body, so they can build up to high levels?
carbohydrates and proteins provide 4 calories of energy per gram	Do they include carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, and water?
eating trans fats can increase the risk of heart disease	Do trans fat may be found in such foods as cookies, doughnuts, crackers, fried foods, ground beef, and margarine?
your body can produce some of the minerals it needs	Do these nutrients dont provide the body with energy, but they are still essential for good health?
potassium is needed for strong bones and teeth	Do too much sodium has been linked to high blood pressure in some people?
vitamin b12 is needed for normal nerve function	Do too much sodium has been linked to high blood pressure in some people?
the gall bladder stores bile acids from the liver	Do this sac-like organ stores and concentrates the liver bile before releasing it into the small intestine?
food moves through the digestive tract by gravity	Do this process is called elimination?
digestive enzymes speed up mechanical digestion	Does the sight or smell of your favorite food make your mouth water? When this happens, you are getting ready for digestion?
lipase is an enzyme that helps digest fat	Do this sac-like organ stores and concentrates the liver bile before releasing it into the small intestine?
absorption takes place only in the small intestine	Do once absorbed by the blood, nutrients can travel in the bloodstream to cells throughout the body?
all the organs of the digestive system are part of the gi tract	Do uRL:?
after food is digested and its nutrients absorbed the only thing that remains in the gi tract is water	Do this process is called elimination?
one function of the gall bladder is to make bile acids more concentrated	Do this sac-like organ stores and concentrates the liver bile before releasing it into the small intestine?
substances that can be absorbed from the stomach include water and salt	Do this process is called elimination?
the large intestine is much longer than the small intestine	Do it is larger in width but shorter in length than the small intestine?
the part of the small intestine where most digestion takes place is the ileum	Does the sight or smell of your favorite food make your mouth water? When this happens, you are getting ready for digestion?
foodborne illness is the common term for a food allergy	Do maintaining the proper temperature slows the growth of bacteria in the food?
breaking down of large chunks of food into smaller pieces	Do this is a chemical process that begins in the mouth and stomach but occurs mainly in the small intestine?
passage of solid food waste out of the body	Do this process is called elimination?
organ that carries food from the pharynx to the stomach	Do then the sphincter contracts to prevent food from passing back into the esophagus?
organ than secretes lipase and ribonuclease	Do this sac-like organ stores and concentrates the liver bile before releasing it into the small intestine?
organs of the digestive system through which food actually passes as it undergoes digestion	Does the sight or smell of your favorite food make your mouth water? When this happens, you are getting ready for digestion?
breaking down of large food molecules into smaller nutrient molecules	Do once absorbed by the blood, nutrients can travel in the bloodstream to cells throughout the body?
organ that secretes bile acids	Do this sac-like organ stores and concentrates the liver bile before releasing it into the small intestine?
shorter of two loops that make up the cardiovascular system	Do then the oxygen-rich blood returns to the heart?
major function of the cardiovascular system	Do the heart is basically a pump that keeps blood moving through the blood vessels?
system comprised of the heart blood vessels and blood	Do the heart is basically a pump that keeps blood moving through the blood vessels?
longer of two loops that make up the cardiovascular system	Do then the oxygen-poor blood returns to the heart?
fistsized organ that pumps blood	Do the heart is basically a pump that keeps blood moving through the blood vessels?
tubular organ that carries blood	Do then the oxygen-rich blood returns to the heart?
liquid connective tissue	Do the heart is basically a pump that keeps blood moving through the blood vessels?
organs of the cardiovascular system include the heart blood vessels and lungs	Do the heart is basically a pump that keeps blood moving through the blood vessels?
the cardiovascular system helps maintain homeostasis by regulating body temperature	Do uRL:?
oxygenrich blood flows from the heart to the lungs	Do then the oxygen-rich blood returns to the heart?
blood that flows through the systemic circulation never flows through the pulmonary circulation	Do as blood circulates through the body, it travels first through one loop and then the other loop, over and over again?
substances transported by the blood include hormones and nutrients	Do uRL:?
nutrients are absorbed by the blood mainly in the small intestine	Do the heart is basically a pump that keeps blood moving through the blood vessels?
transport of substances by the cardiovascular system is necessary for homeostasis	Do uRL:?
when less blood flows to the body surface it allows the body to lose excess heat	Do uRL:?
the pulmonary and systemic loops of the cardiovascular system are not connected	Do as blood circulates through the body, it travels first through one loop and then the other loop, over and over again?
in the pulmonary circulation oxygenpoor blood returns to the heart	Do then the oxygen-rich blood returns to the heart?
in the systemic circulation oxygenrich blood leaves the heart	Do then the oxygen-poor blood returns to the heart?
as blood flows by body cells it absorbs cellular waste products from them	Do then the oxygen-poor blood returns to the heart?
disorder that occurs when plaque blocks coronary arteries	Do s adults?
chamber of the heart that receives oxygenpoor blood from the body	Do this path through the heart is part of the systemic circulation?
chamber of the heart that pumps blood out of the heart to the rest of the body	Do this path through the heart is part of the systemic circulation?
chamber of the heart that receives oxygenrich blood from the lungs	Do this path through the heart is part of the systemic circulation?
event in which blood supply to the heart is blocked so cardiac muscle cells die	Do s adults?
chamber of the heart that pumps blood out of the heart to the lungs	Do this path through the heart is part of the systemic circulation?
cluster of cells in the heart that control contractions of cardiac muscles	Do these cells send electrical signals to cardiac muscles so they contract in the correct sequence and with just the right timing?
blood in the pulmonary circulation passes through the right and left atria	Do this path through the heart is part of the systemic circulation?
each time the heart beats the ventricles contract first followed by the atria	Do these cells send electrical signals to cardiac muscles so they contract in the correct sequence and with just the right timing?
veins must have muscular walls to withstand the pressure of blood pumped by the heart	Do exchange of substances between cells and the blood takes place across the walls of capillaries, which may be only one cell thick?
arteries generally carry oxygenrich blood	Do exchange of substances between cells and the blood takes place across the walls of capillaries, which may be only one cell thick?
when blood vessels dilate it increases the amount of blood they can carry	Do this network transports blood to all the bodys cells?
blood flows through the heart in two paths	Do this path through the heart is part of the systemic circulation?
a valve prevents blood from flowing from a ventricle to an atrium	Do then the valve closes so the blood cant flow back into the right atrium?
the systemic circulation includes the right atrium and right ventricle	Do this path through the heart is part of the systemic circulation?
the aorta is a large blood vessel that carries blood to the heart	Do this network transports blood to all the bodys cells?
veins have thicker walls than arteries	Do exchange of substances between cells and the blood takes place across the walls of capillaries, which may be only one cell thick?
one way that blood vessels help maintain homeostasis is by dilating or constricting	Do constriction of these blood vessels has the opposite effect and helps the body conserve heat?
the leading cause of cardiovascular disease is atherosclerosis	Do a healthy lifestyle can reduce the risk of such diseases developing?
plasma carries dissolved substances such as glucose and proteins	Do platelets also release chemicals that are needed for clotting to occur?
there are more white blood cells than red blood cells in normal blood	Do if your red blood cells carry neither antigen A nor antigen B, you have blood type O?
phagocytes are cells that help form blood clots	Do if your red blood cells carry neither antigen A nor antigen B, you have blood type O?
the main function of blood is transport	Do helps regulate body temperature?
your abo blood type is controlled by genes you get from your parents	Do if your red blood cells carry neither antigen A nor antigen B, you have blood type O?
one cause of anemia is lack of iron in the diet	Do not getting enough iron in the diet is another possible cause?
hemophilia is more common in females than in males	Do the disorder is expressed much more commonly in males because they have just one X chromosome?
solid mass of cell fragments and other substances that plugs a leak in a blood vessel	Do they include anemia, leukemia, hemophilia, and sickle- cell disease?
condition in which blood does not have enough hemoglobin or iron to carry adequate oxygen to	Do not getting enough iron in the diet is another possible cause?
type of cancer in which bone marrow produces abnormal white blood cells	Do it is the most common cancer in children?
genetic disorder in which abnormal hemoglobin causes red blood cells to change shape	Do not getting enough iron in the diet is another possible cause?
the cardiovascular system normally contains about 25 liters of blood	Do 5 to 5 liters of blood that are constantly being pumped through your blood vessels?
antigens on your red blood cells determine your blood type	Do if your red blood cells carry neither antigen A nor antigen B, you have blood type O?
small sticky cell fragment that helps blood clot	Do they include anemia, leukemia, hemophilia, and sickle- cell disease?
dissolved substances in blood include red and white blood cells	Do they include anemia, leukemia, hemophilia, and sickle- cell disease?
classification of an individuals blood based on its red blood cell antigens	Do they include anemia, leukemia, hemophilia, and sickle- cell disease?
genetic disorder in which blood is lacking a normal clotting factor	Do the disorder is expressed much more commonly in males because they have just one X chromosome?
one cause of anemia is excessive loss of blood due to injury or surgery	Do not getting enough iron in the diet is another possible cause?
blood in veins carries oxygen and nutrients to all the cells of the body	Do helps regulate body temperature?
gas exchange occurs twice during the process of respiration	Do breathing (inhaling and exhaling) gas exchange between the air and blood gas transport by the blood gas exchange between the blood and cells?
air is inhaled when the diaphragm relaxes	Do nationalgeogr?
cilia in the bronchi sweep mucus and particles toward the alveoli	Do the bronchioles end in clusters of tiny air sacs called alveoli (alveolus, singular)?
each alveolus is surrounded by a network of capillaries	Do it moves out of the blood and into the air?
the lungs are the main organs of the respiratory system	Do nationalgeogr?
when the diaphragm contracts air flows out of the lungs	Do nationalgeogr?
when you inhale oxygen is more concentrated in the blood than in the air inside alveoli	Do it moves out of the blood and into the air?
pneumonia may be caused by an infection or an injury to the lungs	Do the damage to the alveoli is usually caused by smoking and is permanent?
when you exhale carbon dioxide diffuses out of the blood into the air in the alveoli	Do this brings the process of respiration full circle?
in some people asthma attacks may be triggered by strenuous exercise	Do the damage to the alveoli is usually caused by smoking and is permanent?
particles in air are trapped by hairs in the nose and cilia in the bronchi	Do many other respiratory system diseases are more serious?
during an asthma attack the bronchioles widen and produce less mucus	Do the damage to the alveoli is usually caused by smoking and is permanent?
tiny air sac in the lungs where gas exchange takes place	Do it moves out of the blood and into the air?
large sheetlike muscle below the lungs needed for normal breathing	Do nationalgeogr?
voice box	Do the bronchioles end in clusters of tiny air sacs called alveoli (alveolus, singular)?
process of moving air into and out of the lungs	Do this brings the process of respiration full circle?
process in which cells obtain energy by burning glucose	Do it also removes the carbon dioxide produced by cellular respiration?
one of two passages that carry air between the trachea and bronchioles	Do the blood passes eventually into capillaries that supply body cells?
wind pipe	Do the bronchioles end in clusters of tiny air sacs called alveoli (alveolus, singular)?
organs of excretion include the large intestine and sweat glands in the skin	Do they are part of the urinary system?
blood containing wastes enters each kidney through a ureter	Do the remaining fluid is urine?
all of the water filtered out of the blood in the kidneys is excreted in urine	Do each kidney contains more than a million nephrons?
the process of urination is normally under conscious control	Do the second sphincter and the process of urination are normally under conscious control?
the kidneys filter all of the blood in the body once a day	Do each kidney contains more than a million nephrons?
one function of the kidneys is to help keep blood pressure within a normal range	Do they also secrete a hormone that regulates blood pressure and keeps it in a normal range?
you need both kidneys to live a normal healthy life	Do they also secrete a hormone that regulates blood pressure and keeps it in a normal range?
the liver removes excess water and salts from the blood	Do they are part of the urinary system?
each kidney contains more than a million nephrons	Do each kidney contains more than a million nephrons?
some of the water filtered out of the blood by nephrons is reabsorbed	Do the remaining fluid is urine?
the bladder is the urinary system organ where urine forms	Do the second sphincter and the process of urination are normally under conscious control?
the only cure for kidney failure is a kidney transplant	Do each kidney contains more than a million nephrons?
muscular tube that carries urine out of the body	Do the second sphincter and the process of urination are normally under conscious control?
tiny structure in a kidney that filters blood and forms urine	Do each kidney contains more than a million nephrons?
saclike organ that stores urine	Do the second sphincter and the process of urination are normally under conscious control?
mineral crystal that forms in urine inside a kidney	Do each kidney contains more than a million nephrons?
artificial filtering of blood through a machine	Do each kidney contains more than a million nephrons?
muscular tube that carries urine from a kidney to the urinary bladder	Do the second sphincter and the process of urination are normally under conscious control?
main organ of the urinary system	Do the second sphincter and the process of urination are normally under conscious control?
smallest particle of an element that still has the properties of that element	Do you can see a simple model of a water molecule in Figure 2.7?
carbohydrate that makes up the cell walls of plants	Do it makes up the cell walls of plants and gives support to stems and tree trunks?
biochemical compound that consists of nucleotides	Do a carbon atom can form bonds with other carbon atoms or with atoms of other elements?
smallest particle of a compound that still has the properties of that compound	Do you can see a simple model of a water molecule in Figure 2.7?
class of biochemical compound that consists of amino acids	Do a carbon atom can form bonds with other carbon atoms or with atoms of other elements?
class of biochemical compound that consists of fatty acids	Do a carbon atom can form bonds with other carbon atoms or with atoms of other elements?
protein that speeds up biochemical reactions	Do blood How hemoglobin transports oxygen in the?
atoms can be observed only with an electron microscope	Do you can see a simple model of a water molecule in Figure 2.7?
glycogen is a complex carbohydrate found in animals	Do it makes up the cell walls of plants and gives support to stems and tree trunks?
glucose is a polymer of starch	Do it makes up the cell walls of plants and gives support to stems and tree trunks?
saturated fatty acids are found in oils	Do 10 shows an example of each type of fatty acid?
the genetic code tells cells how to make proteins	Do a reaction that would take years to occur without its enzyme might occur in a split second with the enzyme?
the substances that start a chemical reaction are called products	Do all known matter can be divided into a little more than 100 different substances called elements?
cellular respiration involves catabolic reactions	Do you can read more about both processes in the chapter Cell Functions?
a stroke occurs when a blood clot blocks blood flow to part of the brain	Do strokes occur mainly in older adults?
psychoactive drugs include antidepressants and caffeine	Do both can do harm?
the cerebellum is divided down the middle to form right and left hemispheres	Do one function of each lobe is listed in the figure?
the spinal cord is part of the peripheral nervous system	Do it includes the brain and spinal cord?
the sensory division of the peripheral nervous system carries messages away from the brain	Do once the messages reach the brain, the brain interprets the information?
a single neuron may have thousands of dendrites	Do it branches at the end into multiple nerve endings so it can transmit impulses to many other cells?
the cerebellum controls conscious functions such as thinking and speaking	Do it also carries nerve impulses back and forth between the rest of the brain and the spinal cord?
the two hemispheres of the cerebrum are identical to each other	Do one function of each lobe is listed in the figure?
the peripheral nervous system includes all of the nervous tissue in the body except for the brain	Do it includes the brain and spinal cord?
the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system prepares the body for emergencies	Do it sends messages to the skeletal muscles for movements that are under conscious control?
seizures in epilepsy are caused by abnormal electrical activity in the brain	Do sometimes children with epilepsy outgrow it by adulthood?
all psychoactive drugs are illegal drugs	Do both can do harm?
type of nerve cell that carries nerve impulses back and forth between sensory and motor neurons	Do interneurons carry nerve impulses back and forth between sensory and motor neurons?
largest part of the brain	Do it includes the brain and spinal cord?
part of a neuron that contains the nucleus and other organelles	Do it branches at the end into multiple nerve endings so it can transmit impulses to many other cells?
part of the brain that controls coordination and balance	Do it also carries nerve impulses back and forth between the rest of the brain and the spinal cord?
part of a neuron that receives nerve impulses from other cells	Do nerve impulses travel just as quickly through the network of nerves inside the body?
part of a neuron that passes on nerve impulses to other cells	Do it branches at the end into multiple nerve endings so it can transmit impulses to many other cells?
electrical message carried by neurons	Do nerve impulses travel just as quickly through the network of nerves inside the body?
we see most objects because they reflect light from another source	Do it carries the nerve impulses to the brain?
the colored part of the eye is called the iris	Do it carries the nerve impulses to the brain?
hyperopia can be corrected with concave lenses	Do the lenses focus images correctly on the retina?
the only function of the ears is to sense sound	Do uRL:?
taste neurons on the tongue can detect thousands of different tastes	Do however, you have to use your sense of smell as well to learn that the food tastes like apple pie?
sensory neurons in the nose sense chemicals in the air	Do however, you have to use your sense of smell as well to learn that the food tastes like apple pie?
the sense of smell plays an important role in the sense of taste	Do however, you have to use your sense of smell as well to learn that the food tastes like apple pie?
structure in the inner ear that responds to vibrations by sending nerve impulses to the auditory nerve	Do the cerebellum uses the information to maintain balance?
opening in the center of the eye that lets light pass through	Do it carries the nerve impulses to the brain?
vision problem in which distant objects can be seen clearly but nearby objects appear blurry	Do the lenses focus images correctly on the retina?
layer of cells at the back of the eye where images normally form	Do it carries the nerve impulses to the brain?
if you lost vision in one eye you could still see in three dimensions	Do uRL:?
when light reaches the eye it passes first through the iris	Do it carries the nerve impulses to the brain?
vision problem in which nearby objects can be seen clearly but distant objects appear blurry	Do the lenses focus images correctly on the retina?
the middle ear contains the cochlea and semicircular canals	Do the cerebellum uses the information to maintain balance?
structure in the inner ear involved in maintaining balance	Do the cerebellum uses the information to maintain balance?
bundle of sensory neurons on the tongue that sense chemicals in food	Do however, you have to use your sense of smell as well to learn that the food tastes like apple pie?
nerve cells that sense touch are most numerous in the skin	Do it might decide that the water is too hot and send a message to your muscles to pull your toe out of the water?
rods are lightsensing cells in the eye that can sense dim light	Do it carries the nerve impulses to the brain?
messenger molecule released by an endocrine gland	Do the glands are the same in males and females except for the ovaries and testes?
pancreatic hormone that helps cells absorb glucose from the blood	Do however, each endocrine hormone affects only certain cells, called target cells?
any gland that secretes hormones into the bloodstream	Do the glands are the same in males and females except for the ovaries and testes?
gland that secretes sex hormones	Do the glands are the same in males and females except for the ovaries and testes?
part of the brain that secretes hormones affecting the pituitary gland	Do this hormone travels to the kidneys and stimulates them to conserve water by producing more concentrated urine?
pituitary hormone that stimulates the mammary glands to produce milk	Do table Pituitary Hormone Adrenocorticotropic (ACTH) hormone Target Glands/Cells adrenal glands Thyroid-stimulating (TSH) Growth hormone (GH) hormone thyroid gland Follicle-stimulating (FSH) hormone body cells ovaries or testes Luteinizing hormone (LH) ovaries or testes Prolactin (PRL) mammary glands Effects(s) Stimulates the cortex (outer layer) of the adrenal glands to secrete their hormones Stimulates the thyroid gland to se- crete its hormones Stimulates body cells to make pro- teins and grow Stimulates the ovaries to develop mature eggs; stimulates the testes to produce sperm Stimulates the ovaries or testes to secrete sex hormones; stimulates the ovaries to release eggs Stimulates the mammary glands to produce milk?
master gland of the endocrine system	Do the glands are the same in males and females except for the ovaries and testes?
folliclestimulating hormone is secreted by the gonads	Do however, each endocrine hormone affects only certain cells, called target cells?
the thymus gland is part of the endocrine system	Do the glands are the same in males and females except for the ovaries and testes?
the output of most endocrine hormones is controlled by positive feedback loops	Do however, each endocrine hormone affects only certain cells, called target cells?
type 1 diabetes occurs when the immune system attacks cells of the adrenal glands	Do uRL:?
the hormone adrenaline prepares the body for emergencies	Do however, each endocrine hormone affects only certain cells, called target cells?
endocrine hormones travel more slowly than nerve impulses	Do however, each endocrine hormone affects only certain cells, called target cells?
endocrine hormones affect only nearby cells	Do however, each endocrine hormone affects only certain cells, called target cells?
the pineal gland is part of the endocrine system	Do the glands are the same in males and females except for the ovaries and testes?
all hormones released by the hypothalamus control the pituitary gland	Do this hormone travels to the kidneys and stimulates them to conserve water by producing more concentrated urine?
the pituitary gland is located in the neck	Do this hormone travels to the kidneys and stimulates them to conserve water by producing more concentrated urine?
growth hormone stimulates cells to make proteins	Do however, each endocrine hormone affects only certain cells, called target cells?
luteinizing hormone is secreted by the gonads	Do however, each endocrine hormone affects only certain cells, called target cells?
schistosoma is a human parasite that is spread by a vector	Do mosquitoes spread the protozoa that cause malaria?
an example of a bacterium that may cause human disease is escherichia coli	Do uRL:?
human viral infections include tetanus and measles	Do for example, antibiotic drugs can cure most diseases caused by bacteria?
a common human fungal infection is genital herpes	Do mosquitoes spread the protozoa that cause malaria?
when you cough or sneeze you should cover your mouth and nose with your hand	Do using insect repellent can also reduce your risk of insect bites?
the best way to prevent diseases spread by vectors to is avoid contact with the vectors	Do using insect repellent can also reduce your risk of insect bites?
travelers diarrhea is generally caused by protozoa	Do for example, antibiotic drugs can cure most diseases caused by bacteria?
infectious diseases are contagious because they are caused by pathogens	Do uRL:?
you can pick up the virus that causes the common cold from an object such as a doorknob	Do uRL:?
the proper way to wash your hands is to scrub with soap for at least 20 seconds	Do using insect repellent can also reduce your risk of insect bites?
a disease that can potentially be cured with antibiotics is strep throat	Do uRL:?
athletes foot is a common infectious disease caused by protozoa	Do uRL:?
any organism that carries pathogens from one organism to another	Do uRL:?
any disease that is caused by pathogens	Do uRL:?
type of drug that is used to cure bacterial diseases	Do for example, antibiotic drugs can cure most diseases caused by bacteria?
substance that is used to prevent certain infectious diseases	Do uRL:?
type of organisms that cause malaria and giardiasis	Do for example, antibiotic drugs can cure most diseases caused by bacteria?
any organism or virus that causes disease in another living thing	Do uRL:?
particle that reproduces by taking over living cells	Do uRL:?
cancer in childhood is rare	Do it occurs when the body makes abnormal white blood cells?
warning signs of cancer include difficulty swallowing	Do persistent cough or hoarseness?
surgery is the only way to treat cancer	Do 6)?
type 1 diabetes usually develops in childhood or adolescence	Do regular medical checkups?
your risk of developing type 2 diabetes is greater if you are overweight	Do like people with type 1 diabetes, people with type 2 diabetes must frequently check their blood glucose?
in multiple sclerosis the immune system attacks the joints	Do however, they can be treated with medicines that weaken the immune systems attack on normal cells?
hay fever is a noninfectious disease characterized by a high fever	Do two types of immune system diseases are autoimmune diseases and allergies?
mass of abnormal tissue formed by cancer cells	Do once this happens, cancer is very hard to stop?
any disease that is not contagious	Do two types of immune system diseases are autoimmune diseases and allergies?
disease in which the level of glucose in the blood is too high	Do like people with type 1 diabetes, people with type 2 diabetes must frequently check their blood glucose?
anything in the environment that may cause cancer	Do 6)?
any substance that may cause an allergy	Do after many months or years of shots, the immune system gets used to the allergens and no longer reacts to them?
disease in which cells divide out of control	Do once this happens, cancer is very hard to stop?
any disease caused by the immune system attacking the bodys own cells	Do two types of immune system diseases are autoimmune diseases and allergies?
tube that carries sperm from the epididymis to the urethra	Do they have a structure that suits them well to perform their function?
major male sex hormone	Do during adulthood, testosterone is needed for the production of sperm?
whitish fluid that contains sperm	Do they have a structure that suits them well to perform their function?
male sex cell	Do during adulthood, testosterone is needed for the production of sperm?
coiled tube where sperm mature	Do they have a structure that suits them well to perform their function?
male organ that contains the urethra	Do the scrotum also contains the epididymis?
structure that secretes a fluid that helps form semen	Do they have a structure that suits them well to perform their function?
sperm mix with secretions as they pass through the vas deferens	Do a teaspoon of semen may contain as many as half a billion sperm!?
an adult male normally produces about 100 sperm each day	Do they have a structure that suits them well to perform their function?
testosterone is needed for the production of sperm	Do they have a structure that suits them well to perform their function?
sperm are the smallest of all human cells	Do they have a structure that suits them well to perform their function?
sperm swim at a speed of about 3 inches per hour	Do they have a structure that suits them well to perform their function?
the reproductive system is the only human body system that differs significantly between males and	Do during adulthood, testosterone is needed for the production of sperm?
both mitosis and meiosis are involved in the production of sperm	Do they have a structure that suits them well to perform their function?
testosterone causes the voice to deepen when a male goes through puberty	Do during adulthood, testosterone is needed for the production of sperm?
the only external male reproductive organ is the penis	Do the scrotum also contains the epididymis?
testosterone is a hormone secreted by the prostate gland	Do the scrotum also contains the epididymis?
sperm are stored in the vas deferens until they leave the body	Do they have a structure that suits them well to perform their function?
a teaspoon of semen may contain as many as half a billion sperm	Do they have a structure that suits them well to perform their function?
structure where fertilization of an egg normally occurs	Do unlike a sperm cell, the egg lacks a tail and contains a lot of cytoplasm?
cylindershaped organ through which a baby passes during birth	Do sperm deposited in the vagina swim up through the cervix, into the uterus, and from there into a?
one of a pair of organs that produce and release eggs	Do then, just one egg develops each month until she reaches her 40s or early 50s?
organ where a fetus develops and grows until birth	Do sperm deposited in the vagina swim up through the cervix, into the uterus, and from there into a?
female gamete	Do then, just one egg develops each month until she reaches her 40s or early 50s?
small opening that connects the uterus to the vagina	Do when the menstrual period ends, the cycle begins repeats?
main female sex hormone	Do it also gives birth to the baby at the end of pregnancy?
estrogen causes the changes of puberty in females	Do it also gives birth to the baby at the end of pregnancy?
following puberty an egg is released by each ovary about once a week	Do then, just one egg develops each month until she reaches her 40s or early 50s?
estrogen is secreted by female gonads	Do then, just one egg develops each month until she reaches her 40s or early 50s?
to fertilize an egg sperm must swim from the vagina to an ovary	Do unlike a sperm cell, the egg lacks a tail and contains a lot of cytoplasm?
the menstrual cycle is also called a menstrual period	Do when the menstrual period ends, the cycle begins repeats?
the main female reproductive organs are inside the body	Do it also gives birth to the baby at the end of pregnancy?
the male and female reproductive systems have identical functions	Do it also gives birth to the baby at the end of pregnancy?
estrogen is needed for an adult woman to release eggs from the ovaries	Do it also gives birth to the baby at the end of pregnancy?
the ovaries make eggs only after a female has gone through puberty	Do then, just one egg develops each month until she reaches her 40s or early 50s?
the upper end of each fallopian tube is attached to an ovary	Do sperm deposited in the vagina swim up through the cervix, into the uterus, and from there into a?
an egg completes meiosis just before it leaves the ovary	Do the larger cell is the fertilized egg, which will develop into a new human being?
while an egg is developing in a follicle the lining of the uterus breaks down and passes out of the	Do when the menstrual period ends, the cycle begins repeats?
a babys first teeth start coming in at about 12 months of age	Do by the end of the first year, the baby may be starting to walk?
toddlers grow more rapidly than infants	Do during the later years of childhood, children also start to develop friendships and become less dependent on their parents?
puberty occurs at the same age in all children	Do adolescence begins with puberty and lasts until adulthood?
a boys voice deepens at puberty as his larynx grows bigger	Do adolescence begins with puberty and lasts until adulthood?
people generally start showing signs of aging in middle adulthood	Do this is also the stage when many people raise a family and strive to attain career goals?
a zygote has the haploid number of chromosomes	Do uRL:?
as soon as a zygote starts to divide it is called an embryo	Do it is the development of an embryo and fetus from the expectant mothers point of view?
most organs start to form during the embryonic stage	Do it may also have begun to move?
the fetal period typically lasts about 30 weeks	Do it may also have begun to move?
the purpose of the placenta is to cushion the fetus and protect it from injury	Do it is the development of an embryo and fetus from the expectant mothers point of view?
the umbilical cord is cut only after the baby starts to breathe on its own	Do this stimulates the babys brain to trigger breathing, and the newborn takes her first breath?
puberty generally occurs at an earlier age in girls than in boys	Do it generally occurs about a week after fertilization?
process in which a blastocyst embeds in the uterine lining	Do it generally occurs about a week after fertilization?
fluidfilled membrane that surrounds and protects a fetus	Do it is the development of an embryo and fetus from the expectant mothers point of view?
fluidfilled ball of cells that forms soon after fertilization occurs	Do the outer layer, called the trophoblast, will develop into other structures needed to support the new organism?
cell layer in the blastocyst that will develop into the placenta	Do the outer layer, called the trophoblast, will develop into other structures needed to support the new organism?
tube containing blood vessels that connects a fetus to the placenta	Do it is the development of an embryo and fetus from the expectant mothers point of view?
cell that results when a sperm fertilizes an egg	Do uRL:?
temporary organ consisting of blood vessels from both the mother and fetus	Do it is the development of an embryo and fetus from the expectant mothers point of view?
serious condition that may occur if tampons are not changed often	Do uRL:?
any sexually transmitted infection	Do some STIs can also spread from a mother to her infant during birth?
virus that causes genital warts	Do its important to prevent HPV infections because they may lead to cancer later in life?
virus that may cause aids	Do its important to prevent HPV infections because they may lead to cancer later in life?
viral sti that can be prevented with a vaccine	Do its important to prevent HPV infections because they may lead to cancer later in life?
disease that may develop in someone infected with hiv	Do some STIs can also spread from a mother to her infant during birth?
most common bacterial sti in the us	Do if syphilis isnt treated, it can eventually damage the heart, brain, and other organs and even cause death?
an sti is any medical problem that affects the reproductive organs	Do some STIs can also spread from a mother to her infant during birth?
stis always cause symptoms	Do only some STIs can be cured with medicines; others cannot be cured?
stis are most common in teens and young adults	Do only some STIs can be cured with medicines; others cannot be cured?
hiv destroys lymphocytes that normally fight infections	Do its important to prevent HPV infections because they may lead to cancer later in life?
it is normal to have abdominal cramps during menstruation	Do if found early, breast cancer usually can be cured with surgery?
many stis can spread through body fluids such as blood	Do some STIs can also spread from a mother to her infant during birth?
a person with just one sexual partner cannot get stis by sexual contact	Do some STIs can also spread from a mother to her infant during birth?
untreated stis may lead to the inability to have children	Do if syphilis isnt treated, it can eventually damage the heart, brain, and other organs and even cause death?
viral stis usually last for life	Do if syphilis isnt treated, it can eventually damage the heart, brain, and other organs and even cause death?
aids is diagnosed in anyone who has an hiv infection	Do its important to prevent HPV infections because they may lead to cancer later in life?
injuries to the testes are very rare	Do these are different in males and females?
ovarian cysts are usually harmless	Do if found early, breast cancer usually can be cured with surgery?
all organisms have the same basic needs	Do they include factors such as sunlight, minerals in soil, temperature, and moisture?
environmental factors can be classified as either biotic or abiotic	Do they include factors such as sunlight, minerals in soil, temperature, and moisture?
an individual is a single living thing	Do they include factors such as sunlight, minerals in soil, temperature, and moisture?
members of the same population rarely interact with each other	Do populations in a community also generally interact with each other?
the biotic component of a biome is a community	Do they include factors such as sunlight, minerals in soil, temperature, and moisture?
an ecosystem includes only biotic factors	Do they include factors such as sunlight, minerals in soil, temperature, and moisture?
the biosphere includes all the other levels of organization in ecology	Do populations in a community also generally interact with each other?
individual living thing	Do they include factors such as sunlight, minerals in soil, temperature, and moisture?
any living or onceliving aspect of the environment	Do they include factors such as sunlight, minerals in soil, temperature, and moisture?
group of similar ecosystems	Do they include factors such as sunlight, minerals in soil, temperature, and moisture?
group of individuals of the same species that live in the same area	Do populations in a community also generally interact with each other?
any aspect of the environment that has never been alive	Do they include factors such as sunlight, minerals in soil, temperature, and moisture?
all the biotic and abiotic factors in an area and their interactions	Do they include factors such as sunlight, minerals in soil, temperature, and moisture?
all the populations of all the species that live in the same area	Do populations in a community also generally interact with each other?
the most common pattern of population distribution is a random pattern	Do different patterns characterize different species and types of environments, as you can read in the figure?
only births and deaths change the size of a population	Do if a species populations become very small, the species may be at risk of going extinct?
a pattern of exponential population growth generally cannot continue for very long	Do however, as the population grew larger, it started to grow more rapidly?
the agesex structure of a population may influence the populations growth rate	Do if a species populations become very small, the species may be at risk of going extinct?
the size and growth rate of its populations influences the chances of a species surviving	Do if a species populations become very small, the species may be at risk of going extinct?
a random pattern of population distribution is typical of species in which individuals compete for	Do if a species populations become very small, the species may be at risk of going extinct?
the human population started growing very rapidly about 10000 years ago	Do if a species populations become very small, the species may be at risk of going extinct?
a population pyramid is a graphic representation of the agesex structure of a population	Do if a species populations become very small, the species may be at risk of going extinct?
many countries today remain in stage 1 of the demographic transition	Do whether these populations will ever enter Stage 4 and attain very low rates of population growth is uncertain?
the human population is predicted to exceed 9 billion by the year 2050	Do if a species populations become very small, the species may be at risk of going extinct?
overall the human population has had a pattern of exponential growth	Do however, as the population grew larger, it started to grow more rapidly?
major changes in human population growth rates first began in the 1700s	Do whether these populations will ever enter Stage 4 and attain very low rates of population growth is uncertain?
way in which individuals in a population are spread over their area	Do if a species populations become very small, the species may be at risk of going extinct?
pattern of population growth in which the rate of growth keeps increasing as the population gets	Do however, as the population grew larger, it started to grow more rapidly?
how quickly population size changes over time	Do if a species populations become very small, the species may be at risk of going extinct?
largest population size that can be supported in an area without harming the environment	Do if a species populations become very small, the species may be at risk of going extinct?
average number of individuals in a population for a given area	Do if a species populations become very small, the species may be at risk of going extinct?
numbers of individuals of each age and sex in a population	Do if a species populations become very small, the species may be at risk of going extinct?
pattern of population growth in which the rate of growth slows as the population nears the carrying	Do however, as the population grew larger, it started to grow more rapidly?
all ecosystems at the same latitude are placed in the same biome	Do the major climatic factors affecting plant growth are temperature and moisture?
ecosystems in the same biome have the same type of primary producers	Do the major climatic factors affecting plant growth are temperature and moisture?
plants are the primary producers in all of earths biomes	Do the major climatic factors affecting plant growth are temperature and moisture?
which plants grow in a particular biome depends mainly on climate	Do the major climatic factors affecting plant growth are temperature and moisture?
arctic tundra is found only at low latitudes	Do 18 shows the locations of the worlds major terrestrial biomes?
rivers and lakes are examples of marine biomes	Do these factors, in turn, depend mainly on depth of water and distance from shore?
deep water generally contains more dissolved oxygen than water near the surface	Do therefore, water nearer shore usually contains more dissolved nutrients than water farther from shore?
primary producers in most aquatic biomes	Do these factors, in turn, depend mainly on depth of water and distance from shore?
shallow water near the shore of a lake	Do therefore, water nearer shore usually contains more dissolved nutrients than water farther from shore?
part of a body of water that is too deep for sunlight to reach	Do or, food may drift down from the water above?
general term for a group of similar ecosystems	Do 18 shows the locations of the worlds major terrestrial biomes?
the littoral zone of a lake is the deep water near the bottom	Do organisms in the profundal zone may include clams, snails, and some species of fish?
in aquatic biomes water closer to shore usually contains more dissolved nutrients than water farther	Do therefore, water nearer shore usually contains more dissolved nutrients than water farther from shore?
top 200 meters of a body of water	Do or, food may drift down from the water above?
all the water in the open ocean far from shore is called the pelagic zone	Do they include zooplankton and animals such as fish, whales, and dolphins?
average weather in a place over a long period of time	Do the major climatic factors affecting plant growth are temperature and moisture?
of or relating to the ocean	Do these factors, in turn, depend mainly on depth of water and distance from shore?
there is not enough sunlight for photosynthesis in the aphotic zone of a body of water	Do or, food may drift down from the water above?
the benthic zone of the ocean includes the sediments at the bottom of the water	Do they include zooplankton and animals such as fish, whales, and dolphins?
the ocean is a reservoir in the carbon cycle	Do decomposition of dead organisms and organic wastes releases carbon back to the atmosphere, soil, or ocean?
life on earth could not exist without water	Do uRL:?
individual water molecules may be billions of years old	Do uRL:?
water changes to a gas by the process of condensation	Do 8, depend directly on these sources of liquid water?
water in clouds is in the gaseous state	Do 8, depend directly on these sources of liquid water?
most precipitation falls on land	Do water may be stored in an aquifer for thousands of years?
volcanic eruptions can release underground carbon from rocks into the atmosphere	Do dissolved carbon may be stored in the deep ocean for thousands of years?
the only form of nitrogen that plants can use is nitrogen gas	Do the other ammonium ions are changed into nitrogen gas by denitrifying bacteria?
nitrogenfixing bacteria change ammonium ions into nitrogen gas	Do the other ammonium ions are changed into nitrogen gas by denitrifying bacteria?
the atmosphere is an exchange pool for water	Do decomposition of dead organisms and organic wastes releases carbon back to the atmosphere, soil, or ocean?
water keeps changing state as it moves through the water cycle	Do w?
plants release water vapor to the atmosphere through their leaves	Do transpiration takes place when plants release water vapor through pores in their leaves called stomata?
process in which water vapor changes to liquid water	Do transpiration takes place when plants release water vapor through pores in their leaves called stomata?
part of a biogeochemical cycle that holds a substance for a long period of time	Do the rest of this lesson describes three biogeochemical cycles: water cycle, carbon cycle, and nitrogen cycle?
water that falls as precipitation and then flows over the surface of the land	Do water may be stored in an aquifer for thousands of years?
biogeochemical cycle that includes sedimentary rocks and fossil fuels	Do w?
part of a biogeochemical cycle that holds a substance for a short period of time	Do the rest of this lesson describes three biogeochemical cycles: water cycle, carbon cycle, and nitrogen cycle?
biogeochemical cycle that includes the atmosphere and several types of bacteria	Do the other ammonium ions are changed into nitrogen gas by denitrifying bacteria?
process in which snow and ice change directly to water vapor	Do transpiration takes place when plants release water vapor through pores in their leaves called stomata?
main gas that is causing global climate change	Do these problems will only grow worse unless steps are taken to curb greenhouse gases and global climate change?
naturally occurring radioactive gas that may pollute indoor air	Do however, some indoor air is just as polluted as outdoor air?
air pollutant produced by burning coal that causes acid rain	Do acid rain also damages stone buildings, bridges, and statues, like the one in Figure 25.1?
air pollutant caused by motor vehicle exhaust that worsens respiratory problems	Do in fact, more people die each year from air pollution than automobile accidents?
toxic gas that may be released by faulty fuelburning appliances	Do other possible sources of indoor air pollution include dust, mold, and pet dander?
any harmful substance released into the atmosphere	Do other possible sources of indoor air pollution include dust, mold, and pet dander?
natural feature of earths atmosphere that warms earths surface	Do these problems will only grow worse unless steps are taken to curb greenhouse gases and global climate change?
earths atmosphere is too vast to become seriously polluted	Do however, some indoor air is just as polluted as outdoor air?
cardiovascular diseases may be worsened by air pollution	Do in fact, more people die each year from air pollution than automobile accidents?
erosion of soil adds dust particles to the atmosphere	Do air Pollutant Sulfur oxides Nitrogen oxides Carbon monoxide Carbon dioxide Particles (dust, smoke) Mercury Smog Ground-level ozone Source coal burning motor vehicle exhaust motor vehicle exhaust all fossil fuel burning wood and coal burning coal burning coal burning motor vehicle exhaust Problem acid rain acid rain poisoning global climate change respiratory problems nerve poisoning respiratory problems respiratory problems?
fewer people die each year from air pollution than automobile accidents	Do in fact, more people die each year from air pollution than automobile accidents?
earth had no greenhouse gases until about 200 years ago	Do these problems will only grow worse unless steps are taken to curb greenhouse gases and global climate change?
air pollution is no longer a major problem in the us	Do however, some indoor air is just as polluted as outdoor air?
heart attacks may be triggered by pollutants in the air	Do in fact, more people die each year from air pollution than automobile accidents?
acid rain may kill animals but does not affect plants	Do acid rain also damages stone buildings, bridges, and statues, like the one in Figure 25.1?
earth had no greenhouse effect until human beings started burning fossil fuels	Do these problems will only grow worse unless steps are taken to curb greenhouse gases and global climate change?
outdoor air is always more polluted than indoor air	Do however, some indoor air is just as polluted as outdoor air?
air pollution is a major contributor to respiratory diseases	Do in fact, more people die each year from air pollution than automobile accidents?
it is easier to control the quality of indoor air than outdoor air	Do however, some indoor air is just as polluted as outdoor air?
problem resulting from too much dissolved carbon dioxide in ocean water	Do climate change also affects the quality of ocean water for living things?
main way that nonpointsource pollution enters bodies of water	Do this type of water pollution is called point-source pollution?
main source of chemicals that cause algal blooms	Do they may make the water unfit for human consumption or recreation?
area where water cannot support aquatic life because it is hypoxic	Do both effects of acidification interfere with marine food webs, threatening the survival of many aquatic organisms?
reduction in water quality due to an increase in water temperature	Do fish and other organisms adapted to a particular temperature range and oxygen concentration may be killed by the change in water temperature?
excessive growth of aquatic producers	Do they may make the water unfit for human consumption or recreation?
habitat with moist soil such as a swamp	Do thats why this type of water pollution is called nonpoint-source pollution?
trash that pollutes the ocean is made mainly of plastic	Do climate change also affects the quality of ocean water for living things?
ocean acidification can kill corals and some shellfish	Do both effects of acidification interfere with marine food webs, threatening the survival of many aquatic organisms?
an example of nonpointsource pollution is the release of pollution into water through a pipe from a	Do this type of water pollution is called point-source pollution?
symptoms of waterborne diseases usually include diarrhea	Do most waterborne diseases cause diarrhea?
the total number of people on earth who lack adequate clean fresh water is about a million	Do wetlands also provide breeding grounds for many different species of organisms?
less than half of earths water is in the ocean glaciers and ice caps	Do climate change also affects the quality of ocean water for living things?
algal blooms are due to excess nutrients polluting bodies of water	Do they may make the water unfit for human consumption or recreation?
there is a very large dead zone in the gulf of mexico	Do wetlands also provide breeding grounds for many different species of organisms?
examples of wetlands include marshes and bogs	Do wetlands also provide breeding grounds for many different species of organisms?
waterborne diseases are caused by pathogens in drinking water	Do most waterborne diseases cause diarrhea?
virtually all thermal pollution of earths water is caused by global warming	Do this type of water pollution is called point-source pollution?
the ocean is so huge that it can never become seriously polluted	Do climate change also affects the quality of ocean water for living things?
all natural resources are used for energy	Do from a human point of view, natural resources can be classified as either renewable or nonrenewable?
some minerals are renewable resources	Do from a human point of view, natural resources can be classified as either renewable or nonrenewable?
it takes millions of years for fossil fuels to form	Do this means taking steps to avoid soil erosion and contamination of soil by toxins such as oil spills?
at current rates of use oil will be used up in just a few decades	Do this means taking steps to avoid soil erosion and contamination of soil by toxins such as oil spills?
the use of nuclear power adds greenhouse gases to the atmosphere	Do nuclear power creates another set of problems, including the disposal of radioactive waste?
decomposition of garbage releases methane gas that can be used for fuel	Do although biomass is renewable, burning it produces carbon dioxide, similar to fossil fuels?
led light bulbs use less energy than incandescent light bulbs	Do whether its powering our lights and computers, heating our homes, or providing energy for cars and other vehicles, its hard to imagine what our lives would be like without a constant supply of energy?
energy provided by burning or decomposing organic matter	Do although biomass is renewable, burning it produces carbon dioxide, similar to fossil fuels?
resource that cannot be remade at all or as quickly as people use it	Do using resources in this way is called sustainable use?
use of resources in a way that meets current needs and also the needs of future generations	Do from a human point of view, natural resources can be classified as either renewable or nonrenewable?
coal oil or natural gas	Do from a human point of view, natural resources can be classified as either renewable or nonrenewable?
the use of biomass energy does not contribute to air pollution	Do whether its powering our lights and computers, heating our homes, or providing energy for cars and other vehicles, its hard to imagine what our lives would be like without a constant supply of energy?
fossil fuels form from organic remains that become buried under the ground	Do this means taking steps to avoid soil erosion and contamination of soil by toxins such as oil spills?
anything supplied by nature that helps support life	Do from a human point of view, natural resources can be classified as either renewable or nonrenewable?
recycling is the best way to conserve natural resources	Do from a human point of view, natural resources can be classified as either renewable or nonrenewable?
nonrenewable resource that plants need to grow	Do from a human point of view, natural resources can be classified as either renewable or nonrenewable?
resource that is remade by natural processes as quickly as people use it	Do from a human point of view, natural resources can be classified as either renewable or nonrenewable?
kitchen and garden wastes can be recycled by composting them	Do you can also write a letter to the editor of your local newspaper encouraging everyone in your community to recycle?
methane gas produced by decomposing garbage is a fossil fuel	Do although biomass is renewable, burning it produces carbon dioxide, similar to fossil fuels?
only heterotrophs need food for energy	Do the light reactions use water and produce oxygen?
atp is the concentrated form of energy that is carried by the blood and taken up by cells	Do in your body, glucose is the form of energy that is carried in your blood and taken up by each of your trillions of cells?
producing one molecule of glucose requires six molecules of water	Do uRL:?
some protists can carry out photosynthesis	Do these living things are called heterotrophs ("other feeders")?
all living things need chemical energy for life processes	Do in your body, glucose is the form of energy that is carried in your blood and taken up by each of your trillions of cells?
the chemical formula for glucose is c6h12o6	Do in your body, glucose is the form of energy that is carried in your blood and taken up by each of your trillions of cells?
thylakoids are stacks of flattened sacs in a chloroplast	Do the stroma is filled with watery ("aqueous") fluid?
organisms that make food for themselves and other living things are called heterotrophs	Do these living things are called heterotrophs ("other feeders")?
all photosynthesis takes place in chloroplasts	Do you can see chloroplasts in plant cells Figure 4.8?
each chloroplast is surrounded by two membranes	Do the stroma is filled with watery ("aqueous") fluid?
the role of chlorophyll in photosynthesis is providing carbon for glucose	Do the energy is released from these molecules when ATP loses phosphate (Pi ) to become ADP and NADPH loses hydrogen (H) to become NADP+?
the second stage of photosynthesis takes place in the cytoplasm	Do the light reactions use water and produce oxygen?
any organism that uses energy to make glucose	Do in your body, glucose is the form of energy that is carried in your blood and taken up by each of your trillions of cells?
second stage of photosynthesis	Do the light reactions use water and produce oxygen?
form of energy needed to fuel life processes in all living things	Do the light reactions use water and produce oxygen?
plant organelle where photosynthesis takes place	Do you can see chloroplasts in plant cells Figure 4.8?
form of energy needed for photosynthesis	Do the light reactions use water and produce oxygen?
any organism that obtains energy from other living things	Do the light reactions use water and produce oxygen?
first stage of photosynthesis	Do the light reactions use water and produce oxygen?
cellular respiration uses oxygen in addition to glucose	Do there are two types of fermentation: lactic acid fermentation and alcoholic fermentation?
cellular respiration takes place in the cells of all aerobic organisms	Do there are two types of fermentation: lactic acid fermentation and alcoholic fermentation?
glycolysis takes place in the matrix of a mitochondrion	Do this forms carbon dioxide, a waste product?
the second stage of cellular respiration produces four molecules of atp	Do this forms water, another waste product?
an atp molecule forms when a phosphate is added to adp	Do this releases the energy and forms ADP again?
cells without mitochondria cannot break down glucose for energy	Do this releases the energy and forms ADP again?
a waste product of electron transport is water	Do this forms water, another waste product?
all three stages of cellular respiration are aerobic	Do there are two types of fermentation: lactic acid fermentation and alcoholic fermentation?
the products of photosynthesis are the reactants of cellular respiration	Do together, the two processes store and release energy in virtually all living things?
fermentation produces atp from lactic acid or alcohol	Do there are two types of fermentation: lactic acid fermentation and alcoholic fermentation?
water forms as a waste product during the second stage of cellular respiration	Do this forms water, another waste product?
the final stage of cellular respiration is called electron transport	Do this forms water, another waste product?
second stage of cellular respiration	Do together, the two processes store and release energy in virtually all living things?
organelle that is called the powerhouse of the cell	Do 12 shows the parts of the mitochondrion involved in cellular respiration?
process in which cells burn glucose for energy	Do this releases the energy and forms ADP again?
process in which yeasts in bread produce atp from glucose	Do there are two types of fermentation: lactic acid fermentation and alcoholic fermentation?
process in which bacteria in yogurt produce atp from glucose	Do there are two types of fermentation: lactic acid fermentation and alcoholic fermentation?
first stage of cellular respiration	Do together, the two processes store and release energy in virtually all living things?
final stage of cellular respiration	Do this forms water, another waste product?
some mutations occur when errors are made in copying dna	Do they include ultraviolet rays in sunlight, chemicals in cigarette smoke, and certain viruses and bacteria?
the genetic code is the same in all living things	Do it reduces the risk of the wrong amino acid being selected if there is a mistake in the code?
the translation step of protein synthesis takes place in the nucleus	Do uRL:?
rna is a doublestranded nucleic acid	Do how do the instructions in DNA reach the ribosomes in the cytoplasm? RNA is needed for this task?
uracil is a nitrogen base found only in rna	Do you can see these differences in Figure 5.16?
a nonsense mutation is caused by a premature stop codon	Do it reduces the risk of the wrong amino acid being selected if there is a mistake in the code?
the function of rna is to help build proteins	Do how do the instructions in DNA reach the ribosomes in the cytoplasm? RNA is needed for this task?
the genetic code is the sequence of nitrogen bases in dna	Do the figure shows the bases in a molecule?
down syndrome is caused by a point mutation	Do they include ultraviolet rays in sunlight, chemicals in cigarette smoke, and certain viruses and bacteria?
the codon aug is the start codon	Do the figure shows the bases in a molecule?
a mutated codon always codes for a different amino acid	Do it reduces the risk of the wrong amino acid being selected if there is a mistake in the code?
rna contains the sugar deoxyribose	Do you can see these differences in Figure 5.16?
nitrogen base found only in dna	Do the figure shows the bases in a molecule?
type of rna that copies dna in the nucleus	Do the amino acids are then joined together to make the protein?
doublestranded nucleic acid	Do it reduces the risk of the wrong amino acid being selected if there is a mistake in the code?
nitrogen base found only in rna	Do you can see these differences in Figure 5.16?
type of rna that helps form a ribosome	Do the amino acids are then joined together to make the protein?
any singlestranded nucleic acid	Do it reduces the risk of the wrong amino acid being selected if there is a mistake in the code?
type of rna that brings amino acids to a ribosome	Do the amino acids are then joined together to make the protein?
darwins job on the beagle was to observe and collect specimens wherever the ship went ashore	Do watch this video for an excellent introduction to Darwin, his voyage, and the Galpagos:?
darwin never observed fossils so they had no influence on his theory of evolution	Do what did it all mean? How did it all fit together? The answer, of course, is the theory of evolution by natural selection?
darwin found that the different beaks of galpagos finches seemed to suit them for different types of	Do this seemed reasonable, but how had it come about?
lamarcks ideas about evolution were influenced by darwins theory of evolution by natural selection	Do what did it all mean? How did it all fit together? The answer, of course, is the theory of evolution by natural selection?
darwins ideas about natural selection were influenced directly by a book written by charles lyell	Do what did it all mean? How did it all fit together? The answer, of course, is the theory of evolution by natural selection?
the theory of evolution by natural selection explains and unifies all of life science	Do what did it all mean? How did it all fit together? The answer, of course, is the theory of evolution by natural selection?
all of the giant galpagos tortoises are now extinct	Do this made sense, but how had it happened?
animal breeders produce animals with desired traits by selecting which animals are allowed to	Do both types of pigeons in the bottom row were bred from the common rock pigeon at the top of the figure?
lamarcks explanation for how evolution occurs was essentially the same as darwins	Do as a result, their traits increase in the population over time?
according to malthus disease and famine kill off the weakest people when human populations	Do what did it all mean? How did it all fit together? The answer, of course, is the theory of evolution by natural selection?
darwin knew nothing about the fossil evidence for evolution	Do the theory of evolution by natural selection became the unifying theory of all life science?
darwins book on evolution by natural selection was rejected because it contained very little	Do what did it all mean? How did it all fit together? The answer, of course, is the theory of evolution by natural selection?
islands where darwin made many important observations	Do what did it all mean? How did it all fit together? The answer, of course, is the theory of evolution by natural selection?
scientist who provided geologic evidence that earth is very old	Do the theory of evolution by natural selection became the unifying theory of all life science?
scientist who argued that populations have the potential to grow faster than the resources they need	Do these calamities control population size by killing off the weakest people?
change in the inherited traits of organisms over time	Do as a result, their traits increase in the population over time?
scientist who proposed that living things change over time through the inheritance of acquired	Do these calamities control population size by killing off the weakest people?
process in which living things with beneficial traits produce more offspring so their traits increase	Do as a result, their traits increase in the population over time?
scientist who proposed the theory of evolution by natural selection	Do what did it all mean? How did it all fit together? The answer, of course, is the theory of evolution by natural selection?
evidence for evolution includes millions of fossils	Do a scientist who studies fossils to learn about the evolution of living things is called a paleontologist?
fossils generally form from the hard parts of organisms	Do they have compared body parts, embryos, and molecules such as DNA and proteins?
it is very common for dead organisms to become fossils	Do they have compared body parts, embryos, and molecules such as DNA and proteins?
remains are less likely to become fossils if they are covered quickly by sediments	Do the wasp lived about 20 million years ago, but even its fragile wings have been preserved by the amber?
some fossils form when dead organisms are frozen in glaciers	Do the wasp lived about 20 million years ago, but even its fragile wings have been preserved by the amber?
relative dating can be used to determine how long ago a fossil organism lived	Do this is illustrated in Figure 7.9?
fossil evidence shows that whales evolved from mammals that had always lived in the ocean	Do the similar bones provide evidence that all four animals evolved from a common ancestor?
the footprints of animals are sometimes preserved as fossils	Do a scientist who studies fossils to learn about the evolution of living things is called a paleontologist?
carbon14 dating is a method of relative dating	Do this is illustrated in Figure 7.9?
some fossils form when organisms are preserved in amber	Do the wasp lived about 20 million years ago, but even its fragile wings have been preserved by the amber?
whales evolved from a fourlegged ancestor	Do the similar bones provide evidence that all four animals evolved from a common ancestor?
closely related animals generally look more similar as they grow older	Do they help document that evolution has occurred?
any method of estimating the age of fossils that determines only which of two fossils is older or	Do this is illustrated in Figure 7.9?
any evidence other than organic remains that a living organism leaves behind	Do this is illustrated in Figure 7.9?
molecule that is compared among species to estimate how long it has been since they diverged from	Do they have compared body parts, embryos, and molecules such as DNA and proteins?
hardened tree resin	Do the wasp lived about 20 million years ago, but even its fragile wings have been preserved by the amber?
body part that is no longer used but is still present in modern organisms	Do you wont miss it because it no longer has any purpose in the human body?
any method of estimating the age of fossils that provides an approximate age in years	Do this is illustrated in Figure 7.9?
very early stage of development of an organism	Do they help document that evolution has occurred?
all the genes in all the members of a population	Do the unit of microevolution is the population?
random change in a small populations allele frequencies	Do 12 shows how Darwin thought natural selection led to variation in finches on the Galpagos Islands?
process in which two species evolve the same traits because they live in similar habitats	Do the unit of microevolution is the population?
change in allele frequencies that occurs because some genotypes are more fit than others	Do 12 shows how Darwin thought natural selection led to variation in finches on the Galpagos Islands?
number of copies of an allele divided by the total number of alleles for the gene in a gene pool	Do the unit of microevolution is the population?
group of organisms of the same species that live in the same area	Do an example is the evolution of a new species?
movement of genes into or out of a population	Do the unit of microevolution is the population?
darwin knew mendels laws so he understood how traits are inherited	Do 13, is an example of macroevolution?
horses became smaller as they evolved over the past 50 million years	Do watch this interesting video to learn more about anole speciation in the Caribbean:?
microevolution can be measured by changes in allele frequencies	Do the unit of microevolution is the population?
a total of 300 fossils have been discovered since darwins time	Do how do you think this might affect the rate of evolution?
once a new species forms it stops evolving	Do an example is the evolution of a new species?
it takes millions of years for microevolution to occur	Do the unit of microevolution is the population?
individuals can evolve if their allele frequencies change	Do the unit of microevolution is the population?
the evolution the grants observed in finches was macroevolution	Do an example is the evolution of a new species?
population size determines how quickly allele frequencies change by genetic drift	Do the unit of microevolution is the population?
a gene pool is described by its allele frequencies	Do what causes allele frequencies to change? The answer is forces of evolution?
darwin thought that evolution occurs very quickly	Do an example is the evolution of a new species?
mutation alone can cause rapid evolution	Do an example is the evolution of a new species?
major division of earths history that is known as the age of dinosaurs	Do it may help to think of Earths history as a 24-hour day?
first major division of earths history	Do it may help to think of Earths history as a 24-hour day?
major division of earths history that is called the age of mammals	Do it may help to think of Earths history as a 24-hour day?
event in which the majority of earths species die out	Do changes in Earths geology and climate were no doubt involved?
the jurassic period is called the golden age of dinosaurs	Do the continents continued to move apart?
mammals became the dominant land animals during the mesozoic era	Do the Cenozoic is divided into two periods?
division of earths history into eons eras and periods	Do it also puts more focus on recent events, about which we know the most?
the last ice age ended about 12 million years ago	Do as a result, the recent past is less of a mystery than the billions of years before it?
major division of earths history that began with the cambrian explosion	Do it may help to think of Earths history as a 24-hour day?
single cell believed to have given rise to all of the following life on earth	Do it may help to think of Earths history as a 24-hour day?
the current geological era is the cenozoic era	Do the Cenozoic is divided into two periods?
when earth first formed it had oceans but no atmosphere	Do it may help to think of Earths history as a 24-hour day?
during earths history continents drifted and collided	Do it may help to think of Earths history as a 24-hour day?
if earths history is represented by a 24hour day humans appear at about 800 pm	Do it may help to think of Earths history as a 24-hour day?
earths earliest atmosphere contained more oxygen than the atmosphere does today	Do it may help to think of Earths history as a 24-hour day?
a total of four mass extinctions have occurred on earth since life began	Do changes in Earths geology and climate were no doubt involved?
fish first evolved during the paleozoic era	Do it is divided into six periods?
the jurassic period is known as the golden age of mammals	Do the continents continued to move apart?
the extinction of the dinosaurs paved the way for reptiles to take over	Do it is divided into three periods?
a spiralshaped bacterium is classified as a spirillus	Do they may also be classified by how they react to a dye called Gram stain?
bacteria that form biofilms are multicellular prokaryotes	Do they may also be classified by how they react to a dye called Gram stain?
bacteria cover earths surface but are not found far below it	Do if you write that number in digits, it has 30 zeroes!?
there are more bacteria than any other organisms on earth	Do they may also be classified by how they react to a dye called Gram stain?
yogurt is made with the help of bacteria	Do they may also be classified by how they react to a dye called Gram stain?
a book lying on your desk is likely to be covered with bacteria	Do if you write that number in digits, it has 30 zeroes!?
bacteria are the most diverse organisms on earth	Do they may also be classified by how they react to a dye called Gram stain?
bacteria stain differently with gram stain depending on whether they have a cell nucleus	Do they have a thin cell wall with an outer membrane?
all bacteria cause human illnesses	Do they may also be classified by how they react to a dye called Gram stain?
some bacteria can be used as pesticides	Do they may also be classified by how they react to a dye called Gram stain?
pickles and cheese on a cheeseburger are both made with the help of bacteria	Do they may also be classified by how they react to a dye called Gram stain?
strep throat is a bacterial infection	Do ticks carry Lyme disease bacteria from deer to people when they bite them?
sphereshaped bacterium	Do if you write that number in digits, it has 30 zeroes!?
organism that spreads pathogens from host to host	Do ticks carry Lyme disease bacteria from deer to people when they bite them?
name of the dye used to color bacteria	Do they may also be classified by how they react to a dye called Gram stain?
rodshaped bacterium	Do if you write that number in digits, it has 30 zeroes!?
type of drug used to treat bacterial infections	Do these infections are very hard to treat?
organism that causes disease	Do ticks carry Lyme disease bacteria from deer to people when they bite them?
spiralshaped bacterium	Do if you write that number in digits, it has 30 zeroes!?
early adulthood begins at age 16	Do once adulthood begins, it can be divided into three stages: (1) early, (2) middle, and (3) late adulthood?
late adulthood begins around age 65	Do once adulthood begins, it can be divided into three stages: (1) early, (2) middle, and (3) late adulthood?
aquatic biomes in the ocean are called marine biomes	Do an example of a marine biome, a kelp for- est, from Anacapa Island in the Channel Islands National Marine Sanctuary?
wetlands may be either freshwater or salt water biomes	Do instead, their main limiting factors are the availability of sunlight and the concentration of dissolved oxygen and nutrients in the water?
aids is an autoimmune disease	Do they include autoimmune diseases and allergies?
people can die from an allergic reaction	Do they require emergency medical care?
there are more bacterial cells in your body than human cells	Do together, all the bacteria in your gut may weight just about 2 pounds?
there could be as many as 1000 species of bacteria in your digestive system	Do together, all the bacteria in your gut may weight just about 2 pounds?
photosynthetic bacteria evolved before photosynthetic plants	Do like all organisms, bacteria need energy, and they can acquire this energy through a number of different ways?
mutualistic bacteria kill their prey	Do like all organisms, bacteria need energy, and they can acquire this energy through a number of different ways?
the first line of defense keeps most pathogens out of the body	Do this prevents the harmful bacteria from multiplying and making you sick?
the skin is a mucous membrane	Do this prevents the harmful bacteria from multiplying and making you sick?
blood type is based on what is on the surface of a red blood cell	Do if the person does not have the antigen, they are considered negative?
markers inside a red blood cell can trigger an immune response	Do if the person does not have the antigen, they are considered negative?
arteries return bloodrich oxygen to the heart	Do the right side of the heart pumps de- oxygenated blood into pulmonary circula- tion, while the left side pumps oxygenated blood into systemic circulation?
all arteries carry oxygenrich blood	Do the right side of the heart pumps de- oxygenated blood into pulmonary circula- tion, while the left side pumps oxygenated blood into systemic circulation?
most vertebrates are bony fish	Do they live in all aquatic environments, from freshwater and marine environments from the deep sea to the highest mountain streams?
the lobefinned fish have fins that seem like appendages	Do fins of bony fish: ray fin (left) and lobe fin (right)?
cancer is a disease of uncontrolled cell division	Do carcinogens may be pathogens, chemicals, or radiation?
any mutation can lead to cancer	Do it can cause cancer of the liver?
the heart has coronary arteries that supply it with oxygen	Do the best way to reduce the risk of stroke is to have low blood pressure?
currently dead cardiac muscle cannot be replaced	Do maybe one day stem cells will be used to replace dead cardiac muscle cells?
hormones travel around your body in your blood	Do adrenaline has multiple effects on the heart (it quickens the heart rate), on muscles and on the airway?
the cardiovascular system removes oxygen from your cells	Do adrenaline has multiple effects on the heart (it quickens the heart rate), on muscles and on the airway?
smoking is one of the biggest risk factors for cardiovascular disease	Do 60 minutes a day of vigorous aerobic activity, such as basketball, is enough to help keep your cardiovascular system healthy?
the older a person is the greater their chance of developing a cardiovascular disease	Do 60 minutes a day of vigorous aerobic activity, such as basketball, is enough to help keep your cardiovascular system healthy?
the cartilaginous are the first fish with a bony skeleton	Do cartilage is softer and more flexible than bone?
the cartilaginous fish are the first fish with jaws	Do cartilage is softer and more flexible than bone?
the main reason you need to eat is to get energy	Do either way, it is the glucose molecules that holds the energy?
cellular respiration can be described as the reverse or opposite of photosynthesis	Do during cellular respi- ration, energy from the chemical bonds of the food you eat must be transferred to ATP?
the brain spinal cord and adjoining nerves make up the central nervous system	Do the spinal cord is protected within the bones of the spine, which are called vertebrae?
the brain contains up to 100000000000 neurons	Do messages from the brain pass in the other direction through the spinal cord to tell the body what to do?
the difference between a hydrogen atom and a helium atom is one proton	Do so essentially, your cells are made out of compounds, which are made out of atoms?
matter is anything that takes up space and has mass	Do an atom of Helium (He) contains two positively charged protons (red), two uncharged neutrons (blue), and two negatively charged electrons (yellow)?
chromosomal mutations usually happen when the organism is forming	Do having extra chromosomes or damaged chromosomes can cause disorders?
down syndrome people have 47 chromosomes	Do they also have difficulty learning new things?
the lymphatic system is a closed circulatory system	Do the lymphatic vessels return the fluid to the cardiovas- cular system?
the heart pumps lymph throughout the lymphatic system	Do the role of the lymphatic system in the immune response is discussed in additional concepts?
the products of cellular respiration are the reactants of photosynthesis	Do some of the energy is used to make ATP in the mitochondria during cellular respiration, and some is lost to the envi- ronment as heat?
cellular respiration and photosynthesis are important processes in the recycling of carbon	Do some of the energy is used to make ATP in the mitochondria during cellular respiration, and some is lost to the envi- ronment as heat?
in type 1 diabetes the pancreas produces defective insulin	Do modern meters like this one need only a drop of blood and take less than a minute to use?
in type 2 diabetes the pancreas produces insulin but the insulin is not used correctly	Do modern meters like this one need only a drop of blood and take less than a minute to use?
the mouth is considered an organ of the digestive system	Do they secrete or store enzymes or other chemicals that are needed to help digest food chemically?
the movement of food through your digestive system is an involuntary process	Do they secrete or store enzymes or other chemicals that are needed to help digest food chemically?
headaches are an illness of the nervous system	Do others begin during childhood or adulthood?
cns diseases can be caused by bacteria and viruses getting into the brain or spinal cord	Do thats why its important to know their symptoms?
dna is made of long chains of nucleic acids	Do in fact, in you, the smallest DNA molecule has well over 20 million nucleotides?
deoxyribose is the base in dna	Do there are only four possible bases that make up each DNA nucleotide: adenine (A), guanine (G), thymine (T), and cytosine (C)?
echinoderms have an amazing power of regeneration	Do some species even take care of their offspring, like parents!?
echinoderms such as starfish have a hard external skeleton	Do some species even take care of their offspring, like parents!?
unsafe water supplies can be deadly to humans	Do drinking water can also be affected if a toxin enters the groundwater?
many parts of the world do not have water treatment plants	Do it was estimated that 88% of the cases of diarrheal disease are caused by unsafe water supplies?
plants convert glucose into atp through photosynthesis	Do heterotrophs are found in all levels of an energy pyramid other than the first level?
because of the constant loss of energy there can be a maximum of 7 trophic levels in a food chain	Do heterotrophs are found in all levels of an energy pyramid other than the first level?
an enzyme is a protein that speeds up chemical reactions in the body	Do 1)?
enzymes in saliva break down complex carbohydrates into simple sugars	Do it also causes the release of insulin in response to high blood glucose levels?
you can tell the phenotype of a dog by looking at it	Do however, natural selection can and does differentiate between dominant and recessive phenotypes?
natural selection cannot distinguish between dominant and recessive phenotypes	Do however, natural selection can and does differentiate between dominant and recessive phenotypes?
the excretory system includes organs that are also components of other organ systems	Do large intestine Kidneys Component of Other Organ Sys- tem Respiratory system Integumentary system Digestive system Urinary system?
urine is a waste formed by the kidneys	Do large intestine Kidneys Component of Other Organ Sys- tem Respiratory system Integumentary system Digestive system Urinary system?
men get more uti than women	Do your doctor will diagnose a UTIs by asking about your symptoms and then testing a sample of your urine?
most utis are not serious	Do your doctor will diagnose a UTIs by asking about your symptoms and then testing a sample of your urine?
members of a species that are clumped together may have a better chance of reproducing	Do populations that are decreasing in size have a higher death rate than birth rate?
birth rate  death rate  growth rate	Do populations that are decreasing in size have a higher death rate than birth rate?
breasts are considered extremely important reproductive organs	Do an unfertilized egg will flow through the uterus and be excreted from the body?
a girl is born with over 1000000 immature eggs	Do an unfertilized egg will flow through the uterus and be excreted from the body?
all of the eggs a woman will ever have are produced before birth	Do the female reproductive system also supports a baby as it develops before birth, and it facilitates the babys birth at the end of pregnancy?
the female reproductive system prepares itself every week to accept a fertilized egg	Do the female reproductive system also supports a baby as it develops before birth, and it facilitates the babys birth at the end of pregnancy?
anaerobic respiration is less effective than aerobic respiration	Do products of fermentation include cheese (lactic acid fermentation) and wine (alco- holic fermentation)?
in the absence of oxygen yeast make alcohol	Do products of fermentation include cheese (lactic acid fermentation) and wine (alco- holic fermentation)?
whales are the biggest fish	Do gills help a fish breathe?
some fish can live on land for short periods	Do gills help a fish breathe?
the flatworms are the first significant phylum with bilateral symmetry	Do there are more than 18,500 known species of flatworms?
most flatworms are parasites	Do there are more than 18,500 known species of flatworms?
there are more carbohydrates in a salad than in a steak	Do what should you drink to get calcium? Milk is a good source?
the four types of nutrients are carbohydrates lipids proteins and nucleic acids	Do what should you drink to get calcium? Milk is a good source?
fossils are the preserved remains of animals plants and other organisms from the distant past	Do earthquakes, volcanoes, shifting seas, and other movements of the continents have all affected where organisms live and how they adapted to their changing environments?
fossiltologists are scientists who study fossils to learn about life in the past	Do earthquakes, volcanoes, shifting seas, and other movements of the continents have all affected where organisms live and how they adapted to their changing environments?
a genetic disorder is due to a mutation in your dna	Do if one parent has Huntingtons disease, what is the chance of passing it on to the children? If you draw the Punnett square, you will find that there is a 50 percent chance of the disorder being passed on to the children?
genetic disorders are contagious	Do some genetic disorders are due to new mutations, others can be inherited from your parents?
at genetic equilibrium there is no evolution	Do again, this only works if all five conditions are being met in a population?
genetic equilibrium rarely occurs in nature	Do again, this only works if all five conditions are being met in a population?
bacteria can be used as a weapon	Do they can also ruin food and be used to hurt people?
bacteria are so small and there are so many that they cannot be killed	Do they can also ruin food and be used to hurt people?
over two million people die each year from issues related to air pollution	Do lastly, air pollution can lead to heart disease, including heart attack and stroke?
by using some precautions indoor air pollution can usually be controlled	Do are there any other ways you can think of to protect yourself from air pollution?
lots of people are allergic to shellfish	Do the life-threatening symptoms of anaphylaxis include: constriction and tightening of the airway, a swollen throat or the sensation of a lump in your throat that makes it difficult to breathe, shock, with a severe drop in blood pressure, a rapid pulse, dizziness, lightheadedness or loss of consciousness?
well over 10 of the worlds population has problems digesting milk	Do still, well over 10% of the worlds population is lactose intolerant?
hearing is the ability to sense sound	Do they also sense the position of the body and help maintain balance?
our ears interpret the sounds that we hear	Do they also sense the position of the body and help maintain balance?
the ventricles are more muscular than the atria	Do the left ventricle pumps oxygen-rich blood out of the heart to the rest of the body?
valves in the heart keep the blood flowing in one direction	Do why does a heart beat? The lub-dub sound of the heartbeat is caused by the closing of the AV valves ("lub") and SL valves ("dub") after blood has passed through them?
we need bacteria to survive	Do and yes, bacteria could survive without us?
in your gut bacteria cells outnumber your own cells	Do and yes, bacteria could survive without us?
the development of aids can be delayed by well over 20 years with proper medicines	Do today, individuals who acquire HIV after 50 years of age can expect to reach an average human life span?
hiv spreads through kissing	Do today, individuals who acquire HIV after 50 years of age can expect to reach an average human life span?
your body temperature drops on a cold day	Do thats because the urine is more concentrated and less water is mixed in with it?
your body temperature always tries to be around 986 degrees fahrenheit even if it is very hot outside	Do thats because the urine is more concentrated and less water is mixed in with it?
the job of the eye is to focus light	Do carbon is also returned to the atmosphere by the burning of fossil fuels and decomposition of organic matter?
light is focused on the lens of the eye	Do carbon is also returned to the atmosphere by the burning of fossil fuels and decomposition of organic matter?
most current species extinction is because of humans	Do these include issues associated with climate change, pollution, and over-population?
the size of the human population creates many issues relating to the survival of other species	Do these include issues associated with climate change, pollution, and over-population?
chewing your food is the start of digestion	Do the process of passing solid food waste out of the body is called elimination?
absorption of nutrients from food occurs in the stomach	Do the process of passing solid food waste out of the body is called elimination?
your genome is all of your genetic information	Do uRL:?
all the bases that make up the human genome have been sequenced	Do uRL:?
planet earth has unlimited resources	Does this mean there are unlimited resources? Worldwide human population growth from 10,000 BCE through today?
the human population is running out of resources so it shows logistic growth	Does this mean there are unlimited resources? Worldwide human population growth from 10,000 BCE through today?
bones are made of cartilage and ligaments	Do your bones, cartilage, and ligaments make up your skeletal system?
ligaments create smooth surfaces for the movement of bones	Do your bones, cartilage, and ligaments make up your skeletal system?
sealing up your home keeps air pollution out	Do what else could you do to reduce your exposure to air pollution?
secondhand smoke can cause severe health issues	Do pollen, dust, and mold from houseplants, soil, and surrounding gardens?
babies grow fastest during the first year of life	Do they develop friendships and become less dependent on their parents?
a baby must be able to walk to be a toddler	Do they develop friendships and become less dependent on their parents?
prior to darwin many people believed earth was only about 6000 years old	Do why was he buried in such an important spot?
many people believed that organisms never change and never go extinct	Do why was he buried in such an important spot?
if you think someone has a spinal cord injury take him or her to the hospital as fast as possible	Do the best way to deal with such injuries is to try to prevent them?
if someone loses consciousness chances are they have a brain injury	Do the best way to deal with such injuries is to try to prevent them?
jawless fish were the first fish to evolve	Do a hagfish?
both groups of jawless fish have a notochord	Do a hagfish?
when the body is exercised regularly by performing weightbearing activity bones add bone cells to increase their bone density	Do when the body is exercised regularly by performing weight-bearing activity, bones respond by adding more bone cells to increase their bone density?
bones can break in the same way a pencil breaks when bent	Do it has many contributing factors, including aging, sport injuries, fractures, and obesity?
your skin constantly protects you from infections	Do your skin is your largest organ and constantly protects you from infections, so keeping your skin healthy is a good idea?
your skin makes vitamins like vitamins a b c and d	Do your skin is your largest organ and constantly protects you from infections, so keeping your skin healthy is a good idea?
your brain needs to be exercised to stay healthy	Do drawing with precision also requires use of all the major components of the sensory and motor divisions of the nervous system?
there are fats that are good for your brain	Do drawing with precision also requires use of all the major components of the sensory and motor divisions of the nervous system?
each kidney has up to 1000 individual filtering units	Do this water ends up circulating in the blood because blood plasma is mostly water?
the kidneys only work when you are awake	Do what color will this urine be?
chloroplasts are one of the main differences between plant and animal cells	Do the chloroplast is the photosynthesis fac- tory of the plant?
photosynthesis can only occur during daylight hours	Do these reactions can only occur during daylight as the process needs sunlight to begin?
limiting factors to population growth raise death rates	Do curve B Notice that the carrying capacity (K) is also shown?
as the population increases resource availability decreases	Do when the population decreases to a certain level where every individual can get enough food and other resources, and the birth and death rates become stable, the population has leveled off at its carrying capacity?
the epididymis is over 20 feet long in adult males	Do in addition to sperm cells, semen contains sugars (fructose) which provide energy to the sperm cells, and enzymes and other substances which help the sperm survive?
the testes store sperm until they leave the body	Do in addition to sperm cells, semen contains sugars (fructose) which provide energy to the sperm cells, and enzymes and other substances which help the sperm survive?
of all the organ systems the reproductive system is the only one with significant differences between males and females	Do even though estrogen is the main female sex hormone, scientists think that estrogen is needed for normal sperm production in males?
males make some of the female sex hormone estrogen	Do even though estrogen is the main female sex hormone, scientists think that estrogen is needed for normal sperm production in males?
an egg can be fertilized any day of the monthly cycle	Do some women experience cramping and pain before and during menstruation?
during menstruation bleeding occurs as tissue breaks away from the uterus	Do some women experience cramping and pain before and during menstruation?
microscopes have been around for over 400 years	Do but what else is hidden in your skin?
antoine van leeuwenhoek discovered the cell by looking at cork through a microscope	Do antoine van Leeuwenhoek, a Dutch cloth merchant with a passion for microscopy?
pearls are produced by mollusks	Do some mollusks, such as squid and octopus, do not have shells?
mollusks are the only organisms to have a radula	Do some mollusks, such as squid and octopus, do not have shells?
anaerobic exercises such as running increase muscle strength	Do the resistance can be a weight or a persons own body weight (Figure?
regular physical exercise can prevent lifestyle diseases	Do regular stretching helps people avoid activity-related injuries?
when smooth muscles contract bones move	Do if your heart beats 75 times a minute, how many times does it beat in an hour? A day? A year? 85 years?
tendons join two bones to each other	Do for example, we use our biceps more than our triceps due to lifting against gravity?
a mutation is a change in the dna sequence the change is always harmful	Do so in this case, the mutation is beneficial?
deletions occur when a segment of dna is repeated	Do translocation: When two segments from different chromosomes change positions?
hair and nails are the two main components of the integumentary system	Do keratin is similar in toughness to chitin, the carbohydrate found in the exoskeleton of arthropods?
nails are like the claws of animals	Do keratin is similar in toughness to chitin, the carbohydrate found in the exoskeleton of arthropods?
the brain is part of the nervous system	Do it starts with the special cell of the nervous system, the neuron?
hormones are made by the nervous system	Do it starts with the special cell of the nervous system, the neuron?
all reproductive system disorders are caused by pathogens	Do in both genders, the disorders could cause a little discomfort, or they could cause death?
injuries to the testes most often occur while playing sports	Do if found early, cancer of the testes usually can be easily cured with surgery?
two main types of nonrenewable resources are fossil fuels and nuclear power	Do per capita energy consumption (2003) shows the unequal distribution of wealth, technology, and energy use?
it is possible that by the year 2055 the worlds oil reserves will be gone	Do per capita energy consumption (2003) shows the unequal distribution of wealth, technology, and energy use?
organic compounds are built around the element oxygen	Do proteins C, H, O, N, S Enzymes, muscle fibers, antibodies Elements Examples Monomer building molecule) (small block Amino acids Carbohydrates C, H, O Sugar, glucose, starch, glycogen, cellulose Monosaccharides (simple sugars) Lipids C, H, O, P Fats, oils, waxes, steroids, phospho- lipids in membranes Often include fatty acids Nucleic Acids C, H, O, P, N DNA, RNA, ATP Nucleotides?
fats and oils are lipids at room temperature oils are solid and fats are liquid	Do these lipid membranes are impermeable to most water soluble compounds?
there are only four types of tissue in the human body	Do the four different tissue types work to- gether in the heart as they do in the other organs?
a group of similar cells that work together is known as a organ	Do what other organ systems can you think of?
early earth was full of gas like oxygen and carbon dioxide	Do 1)?
organic compounds are needed to build cells	Do this spring is approxi- mately 250 feet deep and 300 feet wide?
the burning of fossil fuels causes most air pollution	Do other sources of air pollution include the production of plastics, refrigerants, and aerosols, in nuclear power and defense, from landfills and mining, and from biological warfare?
outdoor air pollution changes the natural characteristics of the atmosphere	Do a major source of air pollution is the burn- ing of fossil fuels from factories, power plants, and motor vehicles?
an infectious disease is contagious	Do they can travel from one person to another?
medicines called antibiotics can cure most diseases caused by viruses	Do they can travel from one person to another?
a pedigree shows family relationships	Do sex-linked inheritance is usually recessive?
a pedigree can be useful in understanding inheritance	Do sex-linked inheritance is usually recessive?
there are nerves that send and receive messages to the internal organs	Do refer to the figure as you read more about the peripheral nervous system in the text that follows?
the peripheral nervous system sends messages along nerves from the brain to the spinal cord	Do refer to the figure as you read more about the peripheral nervous system in the text that follows?
glucose is the food of plants	Do uRL:?
glucose is the main product of photosynthesis	Do uRL:?
phenotypes associated with polygenic traits can be represented by a bellshaped curve	Do through the middle of the curve will be individuals who have a combination of dominant and recessive alleles (for example, AaBbCc or AaBBcc)?
polygenic traits demonstrate a wide variation in the phenotype	Do through the middle of the curve will be individuals who have a combination of dominant and recessive alleles (for example, AaBbCc or AaBBcc)?
many birds are altricial organisms needing a lot of parental care	Do it lays a large number of large eggs, producing well-developed young?
exponential growth requires an unlimited food supply	Do what determines the population growth rate for a particular population?
the placenta supplies the developing baby with oxygen	Do after that point until birth, the developing baby is called a fetus?
a typical pregnancy lasts 38 weeks	Do after that point until birth, the developing baby is called a fetus?
theoretically the supply of fresh water could run out	Do diminished water supplies could increase the risk of both internal conflicts or wars between countries?
there are drinkable water shortages in many places of the planet	Do diminished water supplies could increase the risk of both internal conflicts or wars between countries?
the best way to avoid pathogens is to wash your hands often	Do watch the news, and be aware of disease outbreaks?
keeping your immune system healthy helps to fight pathogens	Do watch the news, and be aware of disease outbreaks?
infectious diseases cant be passed from one person to another	Do also, choose a sunscreen that protects against both UVB and UVA radiation?
the use of tanning beds is a safe alternative to tanning in the sun	Do also, choose a sunscreen that protects against both UVB and UVA radiation?
cellular respiration occurs in the chloroplast	Do glucose enters the body when an organism eats?
cellular respiration only occurs in the absence of oxygen	Do glucose enters the body when an organism eats?
every cell in your body needs atp to make oxygen	Do the oxygen moves into your blood, where it travels to every cell in your body?
the lungs pump oxygen to every cell in your body	Do the oxygen moves into your blood, where it travels to every cell in your body?
most producers make glucose through photosynthesis	Do producers include (a) plants, (b) algae, and (c) diatoms?
energy is recycled through an ecosystem	Do producers include (a) plants, (b) algae, and (c) diatoms?
puberty normally starts earlier in boys	Do by the end of puberty, boys are an average of 10 centimeters (4 inches) taller than girls?
adolescence normally begins around age 14	Do teenagers usually spend much more time with peers than with family members?
a clone can be a fairly close genetic copy	Do the cloned DNA can produce a protein (like insulin) that can be used in medicine or in research?
a plasmid is a chromosome from a bacterium	Do the origin of replication is where DNA replication starts, copying the plasmid?
the worlds population is growing so fast that resources are becoming limited	Do but what do each one of those words truly mean?
reusing means processing used materials in order to make them suitable for other uses	Do if you and your family only buy from companies and restaurants that support recycling or eco-friendly packaging, then other companies will also change to be more environmentally friendly?
the ocean tides are a renewable resource	Do this means that wood, cork, bamboo, and crops can be sustainable resources?
fossil fuels are an example of nonrenewable resources	Do uRL:?
girls should use feminine hygiene products on a regular basis	Do it will help you get to know what is normal for you?
a daily shower or bath protects the reproductive system	Do it will help you get to know what is normal for you?
breathing is controlled by the part of the brain that also controls your heartbeat	Do the process of respiration also includes the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between the blood and the cells of the body?
there is not much more to respiration than just breathing	Do the process of respiration also includes the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between the blood and the cells of the body?
the common cold and flu are respiratory illnesses caused by viruses	Do this boy is suffering from whooping cough (also known as pertussis), which gets its name from the loud whooping sound that is made when the person inhales during a coughing fit?
stopping smoking can prevent many respiratory diseases	Do " Simply stated: Stopping smoking can prevent many respiratory diseases?
the same things often cause cardiovascular diseases and respiratory diseases	Do also, do your best to avoid secondhand smoke?
do not go to school when you are sick	Do these can also, of course, keep your skeletal and muscular systems strong?
your nose is an organ of the respiratory system	Do "Grape-like" alveoli in the lungs?
food and air start by going down the same tube	Do "Grape-like" alveoli in the lungs?
dna is located in the nucleus and proteins are made in the cytoplasm	Do notice that in RNA, uracil replaces thymine?
rna contains the bases a c u and t	Do notice that in RNA, uracil replaces thymine?
some worms can have six lips	Do nematodes can be parasites of plants and animals?
most nematodes are harmful	Do contributing factors may include lack of a clean water supply, inadequate sanitation measures, crowded living conditions, combined with a lack of access to health care and low levels of education?
most segmented worms feed on dead organic matter	Do earthworms support terrestrial ecosystems both as prey and by aerating and enriching soil?
the leech is a segmented worm that feeds on live blood	Do phylum Platyhelminthes Nematoda Annelida Common Name Flatworm Roundworm Segmented worm Body Cavity Segmented No Yes Yes No No Yes Digestive System Incomplete Complete Complete?
the mother determines the sex of her baby	Do 1), the son of a woman who carries the colorblindness trait and a male with normal vision has a 50% chance of being colorblind?
females have two x chromosomes	Do 1), the son of a woman who carries the colorblindness trait and a male with normal vision has a 50% chance of being colorblind?
many stis do not cause symptoms especially in females	Do once you have a viral STI, you are usually infected for life?
all stis can be cured	Do once you have a viral STI, you are usually infected for life?
joint pain is a common problem as people age	Do for example, there are numerous ligaments connecting the leg bones across the knee joint?
all joints allow bones to move	Do for example, there are numerous ligaments connecting the leg bones across the knee joint?
your skin is the largest organ in your body	Do skin acts as a barrier that stops water and other things, like soap and dirt, from getting into your body?
the layer of skin you can see is actually dead cells	Do a fatty layer lies under the dermis, but it is not part of your skin?
your body has only three types of muscles	Do what would happen if this muscle was under conscious or voluntary control? There are three types of muscles in the body: cardiac, skeletal, and smooth?
you cannot stop a reflex muscle contraction	Do what would happen if this muscle was under conscious or voluntary control? There are three types of muscles in the body: cardiac, skeletal, and smooth?
water is an unlimited resource	Do examples of this include fertilizer runoff from many farms flowing into groundwater or streams?
many people do not have access to fresh unpolluted water	Do examples of this include fertilizer runoff from many farms flowing into groundwater or streams?
there are five main tastes that humans can perceive	Do so an odor similar to that of your grandmothers kitchen or pantry might be more quickly associated with your memories of that place than a similar sight, which might be more generalized?
you are able to sense many different flavors because of your sense of smell	Do these two senses actually work together to provide some of the basic sensations of everyday life?
carbon is necessary for living organisms to make organic compounds	Do the increase of greenhouse gasses in the atmosphere is contributing to a global rise in Earths temperature, known as global warming or global climate change?
people are able to make the carbon they need for their cells	Do the increase of greenhouse gasses in the atmosphere is contributing to a global rise in Earths temperature, known as global warming or global climate change?
nitrogen is important for creating both proteins and carbohydrates	Do it is then passed along to animals when they eat the plants?
most plants and animals cannot use the nitrogen in nitrogen gas	Do releasing nitrogen oxide back into the atmosphere leads to problems like acid rain?
the water cycle recycles water through both the living and nonliving parts of an ecosystem	Do the process of transpiration, like evaporation, returns water back into the atmosphere?
the water cycle always starts with water evaporating from the ocean or lakes	Do this runoff collects in streams and rivers and eventually flows back into the ocean?
life on earth began about 35 to 4 million years ago	Do mass extinctions?
most life is made of small relatively simple singlecelled organisms	Do well over 3 billion years?
all reactions due to touch are controlled by the brain	Do these receptors are found in joints, tendons and muscles, and allow us to do fundamental things such as feeding or clothing ourselves?
there are millions of touch receptors scattered throughout the body	Do these receptors are found in joints, tendons and muscles, and allow us to do fundamental things such as feeding or clothing ourselves?
transcription occurs in a ribosome in the nucleus	Do the new mRNA is shown in green?
all genes in a cell are transcribed into mrna	Do the new mRNA is shown in green?
ribosomes are the organelles where proteins are made	Do 3) is used to determine which amino acids correspond to which codons?
translation translates from one language to another	Do 3) is used to determine which amino acids correspond to which codons?
not all echinoderms have the ability to move around	Do this makes Echinodermata the largest animal phylum to only have ocean-based species?
sand dollars can be found both in the ocean and on land	Do this makes Echinodermata the largest animal phylum to only have ocean-based species?
vegetable oil olive oil and nuts are good sources of carbohydrates	Do 1)?
unsaturated lipids are needed in small amounts for good health	Do this releases the energy so your body can use it?
the urinary system is the same as the excretory system	Do the urinary system is the organ system that makes, stores, and gets rid of urine?
urine is mostly water	Do the urinary system is the organ system that makes, stores, and gets rid of urine?
about 1 of every 2 people need some sort of vision correction	Do two of the most common vision problems are myopia and hyperopia?
signs of myopia usually begin in childhood	Do two of the most common vision problems are myopia and hyperopia?
minerals are organic compounds	Do they do not provide energy, but they are needed for good health?
vitamins are a good source of energy	Do they do not provide energy, but they are needed for good health?
acids turn blue litmus paper red	Do uRL:?
sodium chloride is an example of a base	Do this can be represented by the equation: NaOH H2 O ! OH + Na+?
bases cannot conduct electricity	Do like acids, bases conduct electricity because they consist of charged particles in solution?
all acids are harmful	Do some other uses of acids are illustrated in Figure 10.7?
a strong acid has a high concentration of hydrogen ions	Do however, only a fraction of ammonia breaks down into ions, so it is a weak base?
the symbol ph represents acidity	Do uRL:?
ammonia is a stronger base than is bleach	Do however, only a fraction of ammonia breaks down into ions, so it is a weak base?
acids are used to make fertilizer	Do some other uses of acids are illustrated in Figure 10.7?
acid rain promotes rapid growth of plants	Do some other uses of acids are illustrated in Figure 10.7?
normal clean rainwater has a ph of 7	Do this is how water forms caves, like the one that opened this chapter?
litmus is the only indicator for detecting acids and bases	Do uRL:?
type of chemical reaction in which an acid reacts with a base	Do this is a single replacement reaction, represented by the chemical equation: Mg + 2HCl ! H2 + MgCl2 You can see an online demonstration of a similar reaction at this URL:?
acids have many important uses in industry	Do some other uses of acids are illustrated in Figure 10.7?
ionic compound that produces hydroxide ions when dissolved in water	Do this can be represented by the equation: NaOH H2 O ! OH + Na+?
ionic compound formed when an acid and a base react	Do this can be represented by the equation: NaOH H2 O ! OH + Na+?
when sodium hydroxide dissolves in water it forms hydrogen ions	Do this can be represented by the equation: NaOH H2 O ! OH + Na+?
concentration of hydrogen ions in a solution	Do uRL:?
a neutral substance has a ph of 7	Do uRL:?
a salt forms when an acid and base react	Do uRL:?
ionic compound that produces hydrogen ions when dissolved in water	Do this can be represented by the equation: NaOH H2 O ! OH + Na+?
measure of the acidity of a solution	Do uRL:?
compound used to detect acids and bases	Do uRL:?
some elements naturally change into different elements	Do )?
only unstable nuclei emit radiation	Do )?
the radioactive isotope of carbon has fewer neutrons than other isotopes of carbon	Do they exist only if they are created in a lab?
radon gas is harmful when it burns and causes pollution	Do other sources of radiation are described in the interactive animation at this URL: http://w?
background radiation is generally considered to be safe for living things	Do other sources of radiation are described in the interactive animation at this URL: http://w?
there is no way to detect radiation	Do you can see a video about the Geiger counter and how it was invented at the URL below?
radiation can break bonds in biochemical molecules	Do this may weaken metals in nuclear power plants and space vehicles, both of which are exposed to very high levels of radiation?
radioactive isotopes can be used to determine the ages of fossils	Do uRL:?
radiation is harmless to nonliving things such as metals	Do this may weaken metals in nuclear power plants and space vehicles, both of which are exposed to very high levels of radiation?
you cannot see radiation but you can always feel it	Do )?
a single large exposure to radiation can burn the skin	Do this may weaken metals in nuclear power plants and space vehicles, both of which are exposed to very high levels of radiation?
human activities are responsible for almost all the radiation in the environment	Do )?
radiation can be used to generate electricity	Do uRL:?
any exposure to radiation causes burns and destroys blood cells	Do this may weaken metals in nuclear power plants and space vehicles, both of which are exposed to very high levels of radiation?
a geiger counter works because radiation changes atoms of a gas to ions	Do you can see a video about the Geiger counter and how it was invented at the URL below?
radioactive gas that forms in rocks underground	Do other sources of radiation are described in the interactive animation at this URL: http://w?
scientist who discovered radioactivity	Do )?
ability of an atomic nucleus to give off charged particles and energy	Do )?
low level of radiation that occurs naturally in the environment	Do other sources of radiation are described in the interactive animation at this URL: http://w?
charged particles and energy emitted by an unstable nucleus	Do )?
scientist who discovered polonium and radium	Do or?
atom with an unstable nucleus that emits radiation	Do )?
an alpha particle has the same mass as a helium nucleus	Do you Try It! ? 4 Problem: Fill in the missing subscript and superscript to balance this nuclear equation: 222 ? Ra !86 Rn+2 He+Energy?
nuclear equations do not need to balance	Do you Try It! ? 4 Problem: Fill in the missing subscript and superscript to balance this nuclear equation: 222 ? Ra !86 Rn+2 He+Energy?
a beta particle has virtually no mass	Do 0 e + Energy 1 You Try It! Problem: Fill in the missing subscript and superscript in this nuclear equation: 0 e + Energy 1?
gamma rays are released only during gamma decay	Do uRL:?
alpha particles can pass through a sheet of aluminum	Do they can penetrate and damage organs deep inside the body?
carbon14 has a halflife of 57 million years	Do radioisotopes with a longer half-life, such as potassium-40, must be used to date older fossils and rocks?
all three types of radioactive decay emit energy	Do uRL:?
a beta particle has a charge of 1	Do uRL:?
during beta decay a proton is emitted by a nucleus	Do uRL:?
all radioisotopes decay at the same constant rate	Do 9 years of decay?
in all three types of radioactive decay nuclei emit energy	Do uRL:?
during gamma decay one element changes into another	Do uRL:?
most of earths helium formed when alpha particles picked up electrons	Do you Try It! ? 4 Problem: Fill in the missing subscript and superscript to balance this nuclear equation: 222 ? Ra !86 Rn+2 He+Energy?
carbon14 forms when cosmic rays strike atoms of carbon12	Do if you measure how much carbon- 14 is left in a fossil, you can determine how many half-lives (and how many years) have passed since the organism died?
carbon14 dating can be used to estimate the age of any fossil	Do uRL:?
method of aging fossils that uses radioisotopes	Do uRL:?
process in which unstable nuclei emit charged particles and energy	Do uRL:?
process in which a radioactive nucleus emits only energy	Do uRL:?
form of energy emitted during radioactive decay	Do uRL:?
particle consisting of two protons and two neutrons	Do you Try It! ? 4 Problem: Fill in the missing subscript and superscript to balance this nuclear equation: 222 ? Ra !86 Rn+2 He+Energy?
rate at which a radioactive isotope decays	Do uRL:?
electron emitted by an unstable nucleus	Do uRL:?
e  mc2 explains why a small amount of mass can produce a great deal of energy	Do mass may change to energy, but the amount of mass and energy combined remains the same?
the letter c in the equation e  mc2 stands for chain reaction	Do you can see another example of a chain reaction at this URL:?
the sum of mass and energy is conserved in nuclear reactions	Do mass may change to energy, but the amount of mass and energy combined remains the same?
nuclear fusion is the opposite of nuclear fission	Do in fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does?
nuclear fission happens only in nuclear power plants	Do in fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does?
an atom bomb explosion is an uncontrolled nuclear chain reaction	Do the spinning turbine runs a generator, which produces electricity?
using nuclear fission for power contributes to global warming	Do in fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does?
nuclear fusion releases less energy than nuclear fission does	Do in fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does?
waste from nuclear fission is no longer harmful after a couple of years	Do in fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does?
the suns energy comes from nuclear fusion in its core	Do 16)?
in the us most electrical energy is produced in nuclear power plants	Do in fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does?
the fuel needed for nuclear fission is very plentiful	Do in fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does?
the use of nuclear fusion for energy involves dangerous isotopes	Do in fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does?
matter that undergoes nuclear fusion is in the plasma state	Do in fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does?
one product of a nuclear fusion reaction is a proton	Do in fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does?
process in which one nuclear reaction leads to others	Do you can see another example of a chain reaction at this URL:?
splitting of a nucleus into two smaller nuclei	Do in fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does?
particle that starts a nuclear fission reaction	Do you can see another example of a chain reaction at this URL:?
form of energy generated by a nuclear power plant	Do in fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does?
joining of two or more nuclei to form one larger nucleus	Do in fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does?
reaction such as nuclear fission or nuclear fusion	Do in fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does?
form of energy released in a nuclear reaction	Do in fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does?
something that is not moving with respect to an observer that can be used to detect motion	Do uRL:?
quantity that includes both size and direction	Do uRL:  You Try It! Problem: Draw vectors to represent the route from the post office to the park in Figure 12.4?
location	Do uRL:?
change in position	Do uRL:?
line along which something moves	Do for example, you might measure the distance a frogs tongue moves in centimeters and the distance a cheetah moves in kilometers?
length of the route between two points	Do in a 100-meter sprint, for example, the distance is 100 meters?
si unit for distance	Do for example, you might measure the distance a frogs tongue moves in centimeters and the distance a cheetah moves in kilometers?
direction is as important as distance in describing motion	Do uRL:  You Try It! Problem: Draw vectors to represent the route from the post office to the park in Figure 12.4?
most foot races are measured in meters	Do in a 100-meter sprint, for example, the distance is 100 meters?
motion is generally defined as an increase in distance	Do measure it yourself to see if you agree?
direction is the length of the route between two points	Do in a 100-meter sprint, for example, the distance is 100 meters?
short distances may be measured in centimeters	Do for example, you might measure the distance a frogs tongue moves in centimeters and the distance a cheetah moves in kilometers?
you can use a map to measure the distance between two points	Do measure it yourself to see if you agree?
a vector is any quantity that has no units of measurement	Do uRL:  You Try It! Problem: Draw vectors to represent the route from the post office to the park in Figure 12.4?
you can measure the distance an object travels only if it does not change direction	Do measure it yourself to see if you agree?
motion is a vector when it includes only direction	Do uRL:  You Try It! Problem: Draw vectors to represent the route from the post office to the park in Figure 12.4?
you could measure distances with a metric ruler	Do for example, you might measure the distance a frogs tongue moves in centimeters and the distance a cheetah moves in kilometers?
speed is one way to measure motion	Do measure it yourself to see if you agree?
the length of a vector arrow represents direction	Do uRL:  You Try It! Problem: Draw vectors to represent the route from the post office to the park in Figure 12.4?
words that describe direction include east up and left	Do in a 100-meter sprint, for example, the distance is 100 meters?
both speed and velocity are vectors	Do a moving object that changes direction also has a different velocity, even if its speed does not change?
the symbol t represents a change in time	Do the rider traveled from the starting point to a destination and then returned to the starting point again?
the length of a velocity arrow represents distance	Do a moving object that changes direction also has a different velocity, even if its speed does not change?
a straight line on a distancetime graph means that speed is zero	Do 8, calculate the speed of the rider between C and D?
speed is negative when an object moves backward	Do to do so, you would use this version of the general speed formula: distance = speed  time For example, if a car travels at a speed of 60 km/h for 2 hours, then the distance traveled is: distance = 60 km/h  2 h = 120 km You Try It! Problem: If Maria runs at a speed of 2 m/s, how far will she run in 60 seconds?
speed depends on both distance and direction	Do to do so, you would use this version of the general speed formula: distance = speed  time For example, if a car travels at a speed of 60 km/h for 2 hours, then the distance traveled is: distance = 60 km/h  2 h = 120 km You Try It! Problem: If Maria runs at a speed of 2 m/s, how far will she run in 60 seconds?
it is easier to calculate average speed than instantaneous speed	Do to do so, you would use this version of the general speed formula: distance = speed  time For example, if a car travels at a speed of 60 km/h for 2 hours, then the distance traveled is: distance = 60 km/h  2 h = 120 km You Try It! Problem: If Maria runs at a speed of 2 m/s, how far will she run in 60 seconds?
the slope of a distancetime graph represents the direction of motion	Do the rider traveled from the starting point to a destination and then returned to the starting point again?
velocity is the scientific term for speed	Do a moving object that changes direction also has a different velocity, even if its speed does not change?
speed can only be greater than or equal to zero	Do 8, calculate the speed of the rider between C and D?
objects moving at the same speed always have the same velocity	Do a moving object that changes direction also has a different velocity, even if its speed does not change?
average speed can be calculated from a distancetime graph	Do 8, calculate the speed of the rider between C and D?
speed equals distance multiplied by time	Do to do so, you would use this version of the general speed formula: distance = speed  time For example, if a car travels at a speed of 60 km/h for 2 hours, then the distance traveled is: distance = 60 km/h  2 h = 120 km You Try It! Problem: If Maria runs at a speed of 2 m/s, how far will she run in 60 seconds?
a change in speed can occur without a change in velocity	Do a moving object that changes direction also has a different velocity, even if its speed does not change?
a change in velocity can occur without a change in speed	Do a moving object that changes direction also has a different velocity, even if its speed does not change?
measure of both speed and direction	Do a moving object that changes direction also has a different velocity, even if its speed does not change?
distance  speed	Do to do so, you would use this version of the general speed formula: distance = speed  time For example, if a car travels at a speed of 60 km/h for 2 hours, then the distance traveled is: distance = 60 km/h  2 h = 120 km You Try It! Problem: If Maria runs at a speed of 2 m/s, how far will she run in 60 seconds?
speed of a moving object at a given moment	Do to do so, you would use this version of the general speed formula: distance = speed  time For example, if a car travels at a speed of 60 km/h for 2 hours, then the distance traveled is: distance = 60 km/h  2 h = 120 km You Try It! Problem: If Maria runs at a speed of 2 m/s, how far will she run in 60 seconds?
speed  time	Do to do so, you would use this version of the general speed formula: distance = speed  time For example, if a car travels at a speed of 60 km/h for 2 hours, then the distance traveled is: distance = 60 km/h  2 h = 120 km You Try It! Problem: If Maria runs at a speed of 2 m/s, how far will she run in 60 seconds?
general term for how quickly or slowly something moves	Do the SI unit for speed is meters per second (m/s)?
total distance traveled divided by the time it took to travel that distance	Do to do so, you would use this version of the general speed formula: distance = speed  time For example, if a car travels at a speed of 60 km/h for 2 hours, then the distance traveled is: distance = 60 km/h  2 h = 120 km You Try It! Problem: If Maria runs at a speed of 2 m/s, how far will she run in 60 seconds?
steepness of a graph line	Do 8, calculate the speed of the rider between C and D?
speed plus direction of motion	Do the opposite occurs when the car slows down, especially if the change in speed is?
negative acceleration	Do the opposite occurs when the car slows down, especially if the change in speed is?
si unit for acceleration	Do what was his acceleration?
symbol for a change in velocity	Do the opposite occurs when the car slows down, especially if the change in speed is?
measure of a change in velocity	Do the opposite occurs when the car slows down, especially if the change in speed is?
symbol for a change in time	Do the opposite occurs when the car slows down, especially if the change in speed is?
how quickly an object changes position	Do the opposite occurs when the car slows down, especially if the change in speed is?
acceleration is a vector	Do the opposite occurs when the car slows down, especially if the change in speed is?
acceleration shows how quickly velocity changes	Do the opposite occurs when the car slows down, especially if the change in speed is?
a change in direction without a change in speed is not acceleration	Do the opposite occurs when the car slows down, especially if the change in speed is?
a velocitytime graph shows how velocity changes over time	Do you can review the concept of acceleration as well as other chapter concepts by watching the musical video at this URL:?
acceleration is always greater than or equal to zero	Do you can review the concept of acceleration as well as other chapter concepts by watching the musical video at this URL:?
acceleration occurs only when there is a change in speed	Do the opposite occurs when the car slows down, especially if the change in speed is?
it is easier to calculate acceleration when both speed and direction are changing	Do what was his acceleration?
the yaxis of a velocitytime graph represents distance traveled	Do you can review the concept of acceleration as well as other chapter concepts by watching the musical video at this URL:?
if a velocitytime graph slopes downward to the right then acceleration is negative	Do you can review the concept of acceleration as well as other chapter concepts by watching the musical video at this URL:?
if velocity is not changing then acceleration is zero	Do you can review the concept of acceleration as well as other chapter concepts by watching the musical video at this URL:?
a change in direction with or without a change in speed is velocity	Do the opposite occurs when the car slows down, especially if the change in speed is?
if the slope of a velocitytime graph is a straight line then velocity must be constant	Do you can review the concept of acceleration as well as other chapter concepts by watching the musical video at this URL:?
mass is a measure of the force of gravity on an object	Do the force of the push causes the swing to move?
most objects have at least two forces acting on them at all times	Do you can learn more about the concept of net force at this URL:?
if opposing forces are unequal in strength the net force is less than zero	Do the net force on the rope is 2 newtons to the right, so the rope will move to the right?
the si unit for weight is the newton	Do youll learn more about Sir Isaac Newton later in the chapter?
when two forces act on an object in the same direction the net force equals zero	Do what will be the net force on the ball? In which direction will the ball move?
when forces act in opposite directions on an object they are subtracted to yield the net force	Do what will be the net force on the ball? In which direction will the ball move?
every sport involves forces	Do the force of the push causes the swing to move?
forces are always balanced when they act on an object in the same direction	Do what will be the net force on the ball? In which direction will the ball move?
whenever an object is stationary it has no forces acting on it	Do the force of the push causes the swing to move?
two forces acting in the same direction always result in a stronger force	Do what will be the net force on the ball? In which direction will the ball move?
combination of all the forces acting on an object	Do the force of the push causes the swing to move?
force that a person or thing exerts on to an object	Do the force of the push causes the swing to move?
push or pull acting on an object	Do the force of the push causes the swing to move?
forces that produce a net force of zero	Do what will be the net force on the ball? In which direction will the ball move?
example of a force	Do the force of the push causes the swing to move?
si unit for force	Do youll learn more about Sir Isaac Newton later in the chapter?
forces that produce a net force greater than zero	Do the net force on the rope is 2 newtons to the right, so the rope will move to the right?
friction is never useful	Do for example, you use sliding friction when you write with a pencil and when you put on your bikes brakes?
too much friction can cause parts to wear out	Do you can see an animation showing how friction opposes motion at this URL: http://w?
friction can cause scrapes on the skin	Do for example, you use sliding friction when you write with a pencil and when you put on your bikes brakes?
friction is a force that opposes motion	Do you can see an animation showing how friction opposes motion at this URL: http://w?
some surfaces are so smooth that they have no friction	Do this creates friction?
the force of friction between surfaces is always useful	Do you can see an animation showing how friction opposes motion at this URL: http://w?
you use friction when you strike and light a match	Do oil coats the surfaces of moving parts and makes them slippery so there is less friction?
it takes more force to slide than to roll a heavy object	Do you can see a video demonstration of the different types of friction at this URL:  (1:07)?
sliding friction is greater when the sliding object is heavier	Do for example, you use sliding friction when you write with a pencil and when you put on your bikes brakes?
friction works in the same direction as the force applied to move an object	Do you can see a video demonstration of the different types of friction at this URL:  (1:07)?
sliding friction is stronger than static friction	Do for example, you use sliding friction when you write with a pencil and when you put on your bikes brakes?
rolling friction is weaker than sliding friction	Do for example, you use sliding friction when you write with a pencil and when you put on your bikes brakes?
when a dolly is stationary there is rolling friction between the wheels and ground	Do ball bearings are another use of rolling friction (see Figure?
static friction prevents you from sliding out of your chair to the floor	Do can you think of other examples of static friction?
the brakes on a bike create rolling friction	Do for example, you use sliding friction when you write with a pencil and when you put on your bikes brakes?
type of friction between ice skates and ice	Do did you ever try to push boxes or furniture across the floor? Its harder to overcome friction between heavier objects and the floor than it is between lighter objects and the floor?
any substance that can flow and take the shape of its container	Do the very large surface area of a parachute, for example, has greater air resistance than a skydivers body?
force that opposes motion between any two surfaces	Do you can see an animation showing how friction opposes motion at this URL: http://w?
type of friction between shoes and pavement	Do can you think of other examples of static friction?
type of friction between a parachute and air	Do you can see a video demonstration of the different types of friction at this URL:  (1:07)?
type of friction between roller skates and concrete	Do ball bearings are another use of rolling friction (see Figure?
type of friction between an object and a gas or liquid	Do you can see a video demonstration of the different types of friction at this URL:  (1:07)?
satellites orbit earth because of gravity	Do gravity also keeps Earth moving around the sun?
an object has a greater mass on earth than it does on the moon	Do the scale measures the force with which gravity pulls an object downward?
molecules of gas are attracted toward one another by gravity	Do you can learn more about Newtons law of gravity in the video at this URL:?
all of the solar systems in the universe formed because of gravity	Do gravity affects the motion of objects in other ways as well?
the mass of an object affects its force of gravity	Do gravity affects the motion of objects in other ways as well?
gravity acts only between objects that are close together or touching	Do in fact, gravity can act over very long distances?
objects that are closer together have a weaker force of gravity	Do gravity affects the motion of objects in other ways as well?
all objects have the same acceleration due to gravity	Do gravity affects the motion of objects in other ways as well?
earth has stronger gravity than the moon	Do the scale measures the force with which gravity pulls an object downward?
the curved path of an arrow is called its orbit	Do )?
weight is measured with a balance	Do the scale measures the force with which gravity pulls an object downward?
people have known about gravity for thousands of years	Do newton is pictured in Figure 13.17?
the moon has both forward velocity and acceleration toward earth	Do gif?
einsteins theory of gravity is better than newtons law of gravity at predicting how all objects move	Do gravity affects the motion of objects in other ways as well?
einstein defined gravity as a force of attraction between objects with mass	Do in fact, gravity can act over very long distances?
si unit for weight	Do the scale measures the force with which gravity pulls an object downward?
motion of an object subject to horizontal force and the force of gravity	Do gravity affects the motion of objects in other ways as well?
force of attraction between two masses	Do in fact, gravity can act over very long distances?
scientist who proposed that gravity is due to curves in space and time	Do gravity affects the motion of objects in other ways as well?
measure of the force of gravity	Do gravity affects the motion of objects in other ways as well?
path of one object around another such as the moon around earth	Do the scale measures the force with which gravity pulls an object downward?
scientist who proposed the law of universal gravitation	Do you can learn more about Newtons law of gravity in the video at this URL:?
force exerted on a material that is pulled apart	Do uRL:?
structure that returns to its original shape after being stretched or compressed	Do uRL:?
force exerted on a material that is pushed together	Do uRL:?
counter force exerted by an elastic material that is stretched or compressed	Do uRL:?
ability of a material to return to its original shape after being stretched or compressed	Do uRL:?
something that is elastic springs back after being stretched	Do can you think of other uses of springs?
an elastic material resists a change in shape	Do uRL:?
elastic force is not very useful	Do can you think of other uses of springs?
when you use a resistance band resistance comes from elastic force	Do can you think of other uses of springs?
glass is an example of an elastic material	Do uRL:?
when you compress a spring it resists the change in shape	Do uRL:?
paper is an example of an elastic material	Do uRL:?
as you stretch a bungee cord its elastic force gets stronger	Do uRL:?
when you release a stretched bungee cord it returns to its original shape because of gravity	Do uRL:?
something that is elastic returns to its original shape after being compressed	Do uRL:?
inertia is the tendency of an object to resist motion	Do you can see an animation of inertia at this URL:?
newtons first law of motion is also called the law of acceleration	Do you can see an animation of inertia at this URL:?
if an object is at rest inertia will keep it at rest	Do the full box is harder to move because it has greater mass and therefore greater inertia?
the inertia of an object is determined by its speed	Do the full box is harder to move because it has greater mass and therefore greater inertia?
newtons first law relates motion to balanced and unbalanced forces	Do the ball starts moving across the field because its inertia has been overcome?
the speed of an object changes only when it is acted on by an unbalanced force	Do the ball starts moving across the field because its inertia has been overcome?
an object with greater mass has greater inertia	Do the full box is harder to move because it has greater mass and therefore greater inertia?
a stationary object resists movement only because of gravity	Do the full box is harder to move because it has greater mass and therefore greater inertia?
balanced forces are needed to change an objects motion	Do the full box is harder to move because it has greater mass and therefore greater inertia?
the tendency of an object to resist a change in motion depends on its mass	Do the full box is harder to move because it has greater mass and therefore greater inertia?
if the net force acting on an object is zero its inertia is also zero	Do the ball starts moving across the field because its inertia has been overcome?
a rolling ball will roll forever unless it runs into another object	Do as long as the net force on the balls is zero, they will remain at rest?
the tendency of an object to resist a change in its motion depends on the objects size	Do the full box is harder to move because it has greater mass and therefore greater inertia?
when you are moving at a high rate of speed inertia makes is hard to stop	Do the ball starts moving across the field because its inertia has been overcome?
newtons first law of motion applies only to objects that are already moving	Do the ball starts moving across the field because its inertia has been overcome?
combination of all the forces acting on an object	Do the ball starts moving across the field because its inertia has been overcome?
force that opposes the motion of any object	Do the ball starts moving across the field because its inertia has been overcome?
an objects motion will not change unless an unbalanced force acts on it	Do the ball starts moving across the field because its inertia has been overcome?
factor that determines the inertia of an object	Do the full box is harder to move because it has greater mass and therefore greater inertia?
type of force needed to overcome inertia of an object	Do the ball starts moving across the field because its inertia has been overcome?
tendency of an object to resist a change in motion	Do you can see an animation of inertia at this URL:?
the relationship between mass and inertia is described by newtons second law of motion	Do this can be represented by the equation: Net force , or Mass F a= m Acceleration = You can watch a video about how Newtons second law of motion applies to football at this URL: http://science36?
newton determined that there is a direct relationship between force and mass	Do this can be represented by the equation: Net force , or Mass F a= m Acceleration = You can watch a video about how Newtons second law of motion applies to football at this URL: http://science36?
any change in velocity for any reason is called acceleration	Do this can be represented by the equation: Net force , or Mass F a= m Acceleration = You can watch a video about how Newtons second law of motion applies to football at this URL: http://science36?
newtons second law shows that there is a direct relationship between net force and acceleration	Do as a result, it wont travel as fast or as far as the baseball?
the greater the net force applied to a given object the more it will accelerate	Do as a result, it wont travel as fast or as far as the baseball?
doubling the mass of an object doubles its weight	Do as a result, it wont travel as fast or as far as the baseball?
the greater the mass of an object the more it will accelerate when a given net force is applied to it	Do as a result, it wont travel as fast or as far as the baseball?
a net force of 1 n applied to a mass of 1 kg results in an acceleration of 05 ms2 	Do this can be represented by the equation: Net force , or Mass F a= m Acceleration = You can watch a video about how Newtons second law of motion applies to football at this URL: http://science36?
force can be expressed as kg  ms	Do weight (F) is expressed in kgm/s2 or in newtons (N)?
your weight equals your mass multiplied by the acceleration due to gravity	Do this can be represented by the equation: Net force , or Mass F a= m Acceleration = You can watch a video about how Newtons second law of motion applies to football at this URL: http://science36?
any object that is accelerating is changing its speed	Do this can be represented by the equation: Net force , or Mass F a= m Acceleration = You can watch a video about how Newtons second law of motion applies to football at this URL: http://science36?
if a balanced force acts on an object the object will accelerate	Do as a result, it wont travel as fast or as far as the baseball?
a 10kg object has greater acceleration due to gravity than a 5kg object	Do as a result, it wont travel as fast or as far as the baseball?
the acceleration of an object equals its mass times the net force applied to it	Do this can be represented by the equation: Net force , or Mass F a= m Acceleration = You can watch a video about how Newtons second law of motion applies to football at this URL: http://science36?
the acceleration of an object due to gravity depends on the objects initial velocity	Do this can be represented by the equation: Net force , or Mass F a= m Acceleration = You can watch a video about how Newtons second law of motion applies to football at this URL: http://science36?
acceleration due to gravity	Do this can be represented by the equation: Net force , or Mass F a= m Acceleration = You can watch a video about how Newtons second law of motion applies to football at this URL: http://science36?
formula for weight	Do weight (F) is expressed in kgm/s2 or in newtons (N)?
formula for acceleration	Do this can be represented by the equation: Net force , or Mass F a= m Acceleration = You can watch a video about how Newtons second law of motion applies to football at this URL: http://science36?
measure of the force of gravity pulling on an object	Do weight (F) is expressed in kgm/s2 or in newtons (N)?
type of relationship between acceleration and mass	Do as a result, it wont travel as fast or as far as the baseball?
measure of the change in velocity of a moving object	Do this can be represented by the equation: Net force , or Mass F a= m Acceleration = You can watch a video about how Newtons second law of motion applies to football at this URL: http://science36?
type of relationship between acceleration and force	Do as a result, it wont travel as fast or as far as the baseball?
forces always act in pairs	Do you know which one it is?
action and reaction forces always cancel out	Do you know which one it is?
action and reaction forces always result in motion	Do you know which one it is?
only moving objects have momentum	Do you can see an animation showing how momentum is conserved in a head-on collision at this URL:?
a smaller mass cannot have as much momentum as a larger mass	Do 0 m/s?
momentum can be transferred from one object to another	Do you can see an animation showing how momentum is conserved in a head-on collision at this URL:?
when an action and reaction occur momentum is usually lost	Do you can see an animation showing how momentum is conserved in a head-on collision at this URL:?
momentum is conserved only in headon collisions	Do you can see an animation showing how momentum is conserved in a head-on collision at this URL:?
newtons third law of motion is also called the law of conservation of momentum	Do uRL:?
momentum is another term for acceleration	Do you can see an animation showing how momentum is conserved in a head-on collision at this URL:?
momentum is a measure of an objects velocity	Do 0 m/s?
if you double the velocity of an object its momentum also doubles	Do thats because its velocity is zero, and zero times anything is zero?
the law of conservation of momentum applies to actions and reactions	Do you can see an animation showing how momentum is conserved in a head-on collision at this URL:?
after two objects collide their combined momentum is always zero	Do you can see an animation showing how momentum is conserved in a head-on collision at this URL:?
a bowling ball has greater momentum than a softball if both have the same velocity	Do thats because its velocity is zero, and zero times anything is zero?
how to calculate momentum	Do you can see an animation showing how momentum is conserved in a head-on collision at this URL:?
si unit for momentum	Do 0 m/s?
equal and opposite forces that act on different objects	Do you know which one it is?
combined momentum of objects remains the same when an actionreaction occurs	Do you can see an animation showing how momentum is conserved in a head-on collision at this URL:?
property of a moving object that makes it hard to stop	Do thats because its velocity is zero, and zero times anything is zero?
equal and opposite forces that act on the same object	Do you know which one it is?
every action has an equal and opposite reaction	Do you know which one it is?
only liquids have buoyancy	Do this upward force is called buoyant force?
any object sinks if its weight is greater than its volume	Do some of the persons weight was countered by the buoyant force of the water?
a denser object weighs more than a less dense object of the same size	Do this upward force is called buoyant force?
helium balloons float in air because helium is purer than air	Do if buoyant force applies to all objects in fluids, why do some objects sink instead of float? The answer has to do with their weight?
the buoyant force acting on an object in a fluid always equals the objects weight	Do this upward force is called buoyant force?
archimedes determined that the mass of fluid displaced by an object equals the mass of the object	Do this upward force is called buoyant force?
the more fluid an object displaces the greater the buoyant force acting on the object	Do this upward force is called buoyant force?
buoyancy is a property of an object that can float in a fluid	Do this upward force is called buoyant force?
fluids exert pressure only in an upward direction	Do this upward force is called buoyant force?
buoyant force explains why some objects float in water	Do this upward force is called buoyant force?
objects float because fluids exert only upward pressure	Do this upward force is called buoyant force?
amount of mass in a given volume	Do uRL:?
buoyancy is a property of some objects when placed in fluids	Do this upward force is called buoyant force?
force that causes an object to sink in a fluid	Do this upward force is called buoyant force?
to remain at or near the surface of a fluid	Do this upward force is called buoyant force?
if two objects have the same volume but differ in density the denser object will weigh more	Do this upward force is called buoyant force?
force that causes an object to float on a fluid	Do this upward force is called buoyant force?
archimedes law explains why heavy objects can float if they displace enough water	Do if buoyant force applies to all objects in fluids, why do some objects sink instead of float? The answer has to do with their weight?
the buoyant force acting on an object in a fluid depends on the total volume of the fluid	Do this upward force is called buoyant force?
act in which an object moves fluid out of its way	Do this upward force is called buoyant force?
ability of a fluid to exert upward force	Do this upward force is called buoyant force?
measure of the force of gravity pulling down on an object	Do this upward force is called buoyant force?
unit for power that equals 745 watts	Do the most powerful engines today may produce more than 100,000 horsepower! How many watts of power is that?
si unit for work	Do how much work did she do?
how to calculate work	Do power = 2500 J = 500 J/s, or 500 W 5s You Try It! Problem: How much work can be done in 30 seconds by a 1000-watt microwave?
use of force to move an object	Do therefore, this weight lifter is doing more work?
how to calculate power	Do power = 2500 J = 500 J/s, or 500 W 5s You Try It! Problem: How much work can be done in 30 seconds by a 1000-watt microwave?
si unit for power	Do how much work did she do?
measure of the amount of work that can be done in a given amount of time	Do thats why it can do the same amount of work in less time?
every time you apply a force you do work	Do therefore, this weight lifter is doing more work?
a more powerful device can do more work in the same amount of time than a less powerful device	Do thats why it can do the same amount of work in less time?
the power of a machine equals the work it does multiplied by the time it takes to do that work	Do the most powerful engines today may produce more than 100,000 horsepower! How many watts of power is that?
the steam engine invented by james watt had the power of one horse	Do the most powerful engines today may produce more than 100,000 horsepower! How many watts of power is that?
the most powerful engines today can produce more than 100000 horsepowers	Do the most powerful engines today may produce more than 100,000 horsepower! How many watts of power is that?
whenever you move your body you are doing work	Do but other than that, there is no work, because there is no net force acting on the box horizontally?
you do work when you push a heavy object even if the object does not move	Do therefore, this weight lifter is doing more work?
work can be expressed in the unit n  m	Do how much work did she do?
a more powerful device can do the same work in less time than a less powerful device	Do for example, compared with a low-power microwave, a high-power microwave can cook more food in the same time or the same amount of food in less time?
if you move an object that weighs 10 newtons a distance of 2 meters you do 5 joules of work	Do how much work did she do?
if you move the object in question 5 a distance of 5 meters you do 2 joules of work	Do how much work did she do?
a device that does 100 joules of work in 3 seconds has 300 watts of power	Do for example, compared with a low-power microwave, a high-power microwave can cook more food in the same time or the same amount of food in less time?
the unit called the horsepower was introduced by james watt	Do the most powerful engines today may produce more than 100,000 horsepower! How many watts of power is that?
a 2horsepower device has almost 1500 watts of power	Do power = 2500 J = 500 J/s, or 500 W 5s You Try It! Problem: How much work can be done in 30 seconds by a 1000-watt microwave?
the more force you apply to move an object the more work you do	Do therefore, this weight lifter is doing more work?
the output distance of a machine is always greater than the input distance	Do therefore, the mechanical advantage is equal to 1?
using a machine increases the amount of work that is done for a given amount of force	Do in each case, the machine increases the distance over which the force is applied, but it reduces the strength of the applied force?
a machine increases the applied force by increasing the distance over which the force is applied	Do in each case, the machine increases the distance over which the force is applied, but it reduces the strength of the applied force?
the output force of a machine is always less than the input force	Do it shows how much a machine actually multiplies force when it used in the real world?
the force you apply to a doorknob is less than the force applied by the doorknob to open the door	Do in each case, the force applied by the user is less than the force applied by the machine, but the machine applies the force over a shorter distance?
all machines that change the strength of the force also change the distance over which the force is applied	Do in each case, the machine increases the distance over which the force is applied, but it reduces the strength of the applied force?
a machine changes the way that work is done	Do in each case, the force applied by the user is less than the force applied by the machine, but the machine applies the force over a shorter distance?
the actual mechanical advantage of a machine is always greater than its ideal mechanical advantage	Do it shows how much a machine actually multiplies force when it used in the real world?
all machines change the direction in which force is applied	Do in each case, the force applied by the user is less than the force applied by the machine, but the machine applies the force over a shorter distance?
a machine that applies force over a longer distance also increases the strength of the force	Do in each case, the machine increases the distance over which the force is applied, but it reduces the strength of the applied force?
if a machines output distance is greater than the input distance the ideal mechanical advantage is less than	Do therefore, the mechanical advantage is equal to 1?
a pry bar changes the strength distance and direction of the input force	Do in each case, the machine increases the distance over which the force is applied, but it reduces the strength of the applied force?
if a machine changes only the direction of force its mechanical advantage is equal to 1	Do therefore, the mechanical advantage is equal to 1?
a lever is a machine that changes the direction of the force that is applied to it	Do in each case, the force applied by the user is less than the force applied by the machine, but the machine applies the force over a shorter distance?
number of times a machine multiplies the input force	Do it shows how much a machine actually multiplies force when it used in the real world?
distance over which force is applied to a machine	Do in each case, the force applied by the user is less than the force applied by the machine, but the machine applies the force over a shorter distance?
percent of input work that becomes output work	Do it is a measure of how well a machine reduces friction?
force applied to a machine	Do in each case, the force applied by the user is less than the force applied by the machine, but the machine applies the force over a shorter distance?
any device that makes work easier by changing a force	Do similarly, if a machine increases the distance over which the force is applied, it must apply less force?
distance over which a machine applies force	Do in each case, the force applied by the user is less than the force applied by the machine, but the machine applies the force over a shorter distance?
force applied by a machine	Do in each case, the force applied by the user is less than the force applied by the machine, but the machine applies the force over a shorter distance?
there are seven different types of simple machines	Do both increase the force used to move an object because the input force is applied over a greater distance than the output force?
the input distance of an inclined plane is always greater than the output distance	Do both increase the force used to move an object because the input force is applied over a greater distance than the output force?
the input force is always applied to the thinner side of a wedge	Do both increase the force used to move an object because the input force is applied over a greater distance than the output force?
the center of a wheel and axle is called the fulcrum	Do this allows you to turn the steering wheel with relatively little effort, while the axle of the steering wheel applies enough force to turn the car?
the closer together the threads of a screw are the harder it is to turn the screw	Do both increase the force used to move an object because the input force is applied over a greater distance than the output force?
a wedge is used to cut or split objects	Do both increase the force used to move an object because the input force is applied over a greater distance than the output force?
when you use a hammer to pry a nail out of board the hammer is a first class lever	Do 19 describes the three classes?
a lever always increases the force applied to the lever	Do why would this be useful when you are moving a hockey stick or baseball bat, both of which are third-class levers?
when you turn a screw you apply force along its inclined plane	Do both increase the force used to move an object because the input force is applied over a greater distance than the output force?
the wheel of a ferris wheel turns more quickly than the axle	Do this allows you to turn the steering wheel with relatively little effort, while the axle of the steering wheel applies enough force to turn the car?
a lever may or may not change the strength of the applied force	Do why would this be useful when you are moving a hockey stick or baseball bat, both of which are third-class levers?
the wheel of a wheel and axle turns more slowly than the axle	Do this allows you to turn the steering wheel with relatively little effort, while the axle of the steering wheel applies enough force to turn the car?
a single fixed pulley has an ideal mechanical advantage of 1	Do this occurs only with first class-levers?
a compound pulley always contains at least two fixed pulleys	Do to learn more about the mechanical advantage of different types of pulleys, watch the video at this link: http://video?
a zipline pulley is an example of a single moveable pulley	Do to learn more about the mechanical advantage of different types of pulleys, watch the video at this link: http://video?
simple machine that consists of a rope and grooved wheel	Do this allows you to turn the steering wheel with relatively little effort, while the axle of the steering wheel applies enough force to turn the car?
type of lever in which the fulcrum is between the input and output forces	Do this occurs only with first class-levers?
simple machine consisting of two connected rings or cylinders that both turn around a single center point	Do this allows you to turn the steering wheel with relatively little effort, while the axle of the steering wheel applies enough force to turn the car?
simple machine that consists of an inclined plane wrapped around a cylinder or cone	Do both increase the force used to move an object because the input force is applied over a greater distance than the output force?
fixed point of a lever around which the bar rotates	Do 19 describes the three classes?
simple machine consisting of a sloping surface that connects lower and higher elevations	Do an inclined plane with a gentler slope has a greater mechanical advantage and requires less input force to move an object to a higher elevation?
type of lever in which input and output forces are on the same side of the fulcrum	Do this occurs only with first class-levers?
how greatly a machine increases the applied force	Do using the handle to turn the axle of the wheel winds or unwinds the line?
how well a machine deals with friction	Do the greater the number of simple machines it contains, the greater is its mechanical advantage?
example of a third class lever	Do using the handle to turn the axle of the wheel winds or unwinds the line?
any machine that consists of more than one simple machine	Do to see if you can identify the simple machines in a lawn mower, go to the URL below and click on Find the Simple Machines?
example of a wheel and axle that works as a pulley	Do using the handle to turn the axle of the wheel winds or unwinds the line?
machine consisting of a wheel and axle and a lever	Do using the handle to turn the axle of the wheel winds or unwinds the line?
machine consisting of two levers and two wedges	Do the blades themselves are wedges, with a sharp cutting edge and a thicker dull edge?
a wheel and axle is an example of a compound machine	Do using the handle to turn the axle of the wheel winds or unwinds the line?
a pulley system that contains a fixed and a moveable pulley is a compound machine	Do using the handle to turn the axle of the wheel winds or unwinds the line?
a single pulley is less efficient than a pulley system that consists of two or more pulleys	Do using the handle to turn the axle of the wheel winds or unwinds the line?
the mechanical advantage of a compound machine is generally less than that of a simple machine	Do the greater the number of simple machines it contains, the greater is its mechanical advantage?
friction tends to be a bigger problem in a compound machine than in a simple machine	Do the greater the number of simple machines it contains, the greater is its mechanical advantage?
some compound machines consist of thousands of simple machines	Do to see if you can identify the simple machines in a lawn mower, go to the URL below and click on Find the Simple Machines?
the output force is exerted by the handle ends of the levers in scissors	Do the blades themselves are wedges, with a sharp cutting edge and a thicker dull edge?
scissors change the direction of the input force	Do the blades themselves are wedges, with a sharp cutting edge and a thicker dull edge?
the fulcrum in a fishing rod is at the center of the rod	Do using the handle to turn the axle of the wheel winds or unwinds the line?
compound machines have more moving parts than simple machines	Do the greater the number of simple machines it contains, the greater is its mechanical advantage?
the fewer simple machines a compound machine contains the greater its mechanical advantage	Do the greater the number of simple machines it contains, the greater is its mechanical advantage?
compound machines have more friction to overcome than do simple machines	Do the greater the number of simple machines it contains, the greater is its mechanical advantage?
energy stored in an object because of its position or shape	Do for example leaves on trees have potential energy because they could fall due to the pull of gravity?
stored energy due to an objects shape	Do what will happen when the handspring is released?
use of force to move matter	Do mechanical energy is the energy of objects that are moving or have the potential to move?
energy of moving matter	Do can you think of other examples?
stored energy due to an objects position	Do for example leaves on trees have potential energy because they could fall due to the pull of gravity?
ability to do work	Do mechanical energy is the energy of objects that are moving or have the potential to move?
process in which energy changes from one type or form to another	Do these changes in energy are examples of energy conversion, the process in which energy changes from one type or form to another?
the atoms of matter have kinetic energy	Do can you think of other examples?
an objects velocity affects its kinetic energy more than its mass does	Do can you think of other examples?
a heavier object has less gravitational potential energy than a lighter object at the same height	Do if he weighs 70 newtons and the diving board is 5 meters above Earths surface, then his potential energy is: GPE = 70 N  5 m = 350 N  m, or 350 J?
compressing a spring gives it potential energy	Do what will happen when the handspring is released?
energy conversions cannot be reversed	Do can you think of other examples?
most forms of energy can also be classified as kinetic or potential energy	Do can you think of other examples?
if the mass of an object doubles its kinetic energy is only half as great	Do can you think of other examples?
kinetic energy and velocity have an inverse relationship	Do can you think of other examples?
clothes hanging motionless on a clothesline do not have any energy	Do can you think of other examples?
changing the shape of an elastic material gives it potential energy	Do what will happen when the handspring is released?
if you double the weight of an object its gravitational potential energy also doubles	Do if he weighs 70 newtons and the diving board is 5 meters above Earths surface, then his potential energy is: GPE = 70 N  5 m = 350 N  m, or 350 J?
the higher above the ground you are the less gravitational potential energy you have	Do if he weighs 70 newtons and the diving board is 5 meters above Earths surface, then his potential energy is: GPE = 70 N  5 m = 350 N  m, or 350 J?
the energy of a child on a swing changes back and forth between kinetic and potential energy	Do can you think of other examples?
some of the kinetic energy of the child in question 8 is given off as heat	Do for example, the divers kinetic energy at the bottom of his fall is the same as his potential energy when he was on the diving board, except for a small amount of heat resulting from friction with the air as he falls?
energy conversions are always permanent changes in energy	Do can you think of other examples?
energy released when atomic nuclei split apart	Do some of the suns energy travels to Earth, where it warms the planet and provides the energy for photosynthesis (see Figure?
total kinetic energy of all the atoms in an object	Do you can see an example of this in Figure 17.13?
energy stored in chemical bonds	Do when food molecules are broken down, the energy is released and may be used to do work?
energy of an object that is moving or has the potential to move	Do what are some other examples of mechanical energy?
energy that travels in waves through matter from a vibrating object	Do 14)?
kinetic energy of moving electrons	Do what are some other examples of mechanical energy?
energy that travels in electrical and magnetic waves	Do 14)?
stars release electromagnetic energy into space	Do 14)?
the energy stored in food is chemical energy	Do when food molecules are broken down, the energy is released and may be used to do work?
during photosynthesis plants change thermal energy to chemical energy	Do when food molecules are broken down, the energy is released and may be used to do work?
a stretched rubber band has mechanical energy	Do what are some other examples of mechanical energy?
when you plug in a lamp electromagnetic energy is converted to light energy	Do 14)?
kinetic and potential energy add up to mechanical energy	Do what are some other examples of mechanical energy?
there is stored chemical energy in food	Do when food molecules are broken down, the energy is released and may be used to do work?
a lightning bolt is a powerful discharge of light energy	Do some of the suns energy travels to Earth, where it warms the planet and provides the energy for photosynthesis (see Figure?
most of the electrical energy we use is produced in power plants	Do two other sources of electrical energy are pictured in Figure 17.11?
the sun produces nuclear energy when hydrogen nuclei undergo fusion	Do some of the suns energy travels to Earth, where it warms the planet and provides the energy for photosynthesis (see Figure?
some of the suns energy travels through space to heat and light earth	Do 14)?
the atoms that make up matter are in constant motion	Do you can see an example of this in Figure 17.13?
radio waves are a type of sound waves	Do 14)?
energy rarely changes from one form to another	Do what are some other examples of mechanical energy?
one form of energy cannot change into two or more different forms of energy	Do what are some other examples of mechanical energy?
all natural resources need to be conserved so they are not used up	Do nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels and radioactive elements such as uranium?
most of the electricity in the us is generated by burning petroleum	Do uRL:?
the use of fossil fuels is a major cause of global warming	Do nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels and radioactive elements such as uranium?
nuclear energy is a renewable energy resource	Do wind, solar, and geothermal energy contribute the least to global energy use, despite the fact that they are virtually limitless in supply and nonpolluting?
natural gas formed when the remains of swamp plants were pressed beneath layers of sediments	Do ancient plants changed energy in?
it takes millions of years for fossil fuels to form	Do nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels and radioactive elements such as uranium?
most of the electric power in the us is generated from running water	Do nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels and radioactive elements such as uranium?
the burning of fossil fuels leads to the formation of acid rain	Do nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels and radioactive elements such as uranium?
it takes a large amount of uranium to produce a small amount of nuclear energy	Do nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels and radioactive elements such as uranium?
renewable energy resources produce air pollution	Do what do you do to save energy? What else could you do?
fossil fuels provide most of the worlds energy	Do nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels and radioactive elements such as uranium?
coal and petroleum are often found together	Do ancient plants changed energy in?
smog comes from the burning of fossil fuels	Do nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels and radioactive elements such as uranium?
using moving water to generate electricity never harms the environment	Do uRL:?
wind turbines change the kinetic energy of wind to electrical energy	Do uRL:?
saving resources by using them more efficiently	Do what do you do to save energy? What else could you do?
resource that is limited in supply and cannot be replaced	Do nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels and radioactive elements such as uranium?
energy from plant materials	Do uRL:?
mixture of hydrocarbons that formed from the remains of dead organisms	Do ancient plants changed energy in?
heat from below earths surface that can be used for energy	Do what do you do to save energy? What else could you do?
anything people use that comes from nature	Do nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels and radioactive elements such as uranium?
resource that is virtually limitless in supply or can be replaced quickly	Do wind, solar, and geothermal energy contribute the least to global energy use, despite the fact that they are virtually limitless in supply and nonpolluting?
device for measuring temperature	Do when particles move more slowly, temperature is lower and an object feels cooler?
total kinetic energy of particles of matter	Do when particles move more slowly, temperature is lower and an object feels cooler?
amount of energy needed to raise the temperature of 1 gram of a substance by 1 c	Do substances differ in their specific heat?
average kinetic energy of particles of matter	Do when particles move more slowly, temperature is lower and an object feels cooler?
scale for measuring temperature	Do )?
transfer of thermal energy between objects with different temperatures	Do heat" at this URL:?
measure that affects the thermal energy of matter but not its temperature	Do heat" at this URL:?
the particles of all matter are in constant random motion	Do when particles move more slowly, temperature is lower and an object feels cooler?
objects with the same temperature always have the same total kinetic energy	Do when particles move more slowly, temperature is lower and an object feels cooler?
a thermometer measures temperature relative to two reference temperatures	Do )?
heat is always transferred from a larger object to a smaller object	Do heat" at this URL:?
differences in the specific heat of land and water affect climate	Do 76 4.18?
only warm or hot objects have thermal energy	Do heat" at this URL:?
if particles of an object start to move more quickly the objects temperature rises	Do when particles move more slowly, temperature is lower and an object feels cooler?
temperature is the same thing as thermal energy	Do when particles move more slowly, temperature is lower and an object feels cooler?
an object with a higher temperature always has greater thermal energy than an object with a lower	Do when particles move more slowly, temperature is lower and an object feels cooler?
on the celsius scale the boiling point of water is 32 c	Do )?
most types of matter expand to some degree when they get warmer	Do )?
temperature is a physical property of matter	Do when particles move more slowly, temperature is lower and an object feels cooler?
thermal energy always moves from an object with a higher temperature to an object with a lower	Do when particles move more slowly, temperature is lower and an object feels cooler?
specific heat is a property that is specific to a given type of matter	Do 76 4.18?
most metals have a very high specific heat	Do 76 4.18?
material that allows little if any conduction of thermal energy	Do for a deeper understanding of this method of heat transfer, watch the animation "Conduction" at this URL: http://w?
transfer of thermal energy by waves that can travel through space	Do in fact, when a room is full of people, it may feel noticeably warmer because of all the thermal energy the people radiate! To learn more about thermal radiation, watch "Radiation" at the URL below?
flow of particles in a fluid due to differences in temperature and density	Do you can learn more about convection currents by watching "Convection" at this URL:?
material that is good at transferring thermal energy by conduction	Do in fact, when a room is full of people, it may feel noticeably warmer because of all the thermal energy the people radiate! To learn more about thermal radiation, watch "Radiation" at the URL below?
amount of mass in a given volume of matter	Do for a deeper understanding of this method of heat transfer, watch the animation "Conduction" at this URL: http://w?
transfer of thermal energy between particles of matter that are touching	Do for a deeper understanding of this method of heat transfer, watch the animation "Conduction" at this URL: http://w?
transfer of thermal energy by particles moving through a fluid	Do for a deeper understanding of this method of heat transfer, watch the animation "Conduction" at this URL: http://w?
conduction occurs when particles of matter flow	Do for a deeper understanding of this method of heat transfer, watch the animation "Conduction" at this URL: http://w?
insulation can keep a house cool on a hot day	Do thats why pot handles and cooking utensils are often made of these materials?
thermal energy is always transferred from cooler to warmer objects	Do in fact, when a room is full of people, it may feel noticeably warmer because of all the thermal energy the people radiate! To learn more about thermal radiation, watch "Radiation" at the URL below?
land and sea breezes are examples of convection currents	Do you can learn more about convection currents by watching "Convection" at this URL:?
only hot objects radiate thermal energy	Do in fact, when a room is full of people, it may feel noticeably warmer because of all the thermal energy the people radiate! To learn more about thermal radiation, watch "Radiation" at the URL below?
conduction occurs only between particles that collide	Do for a deeper understanding of this method of heat transfer, watch the animation "Conduction" at this URL: http://w?
wood is an example of a good thermal conductor	Do thats why pot handles and cooking utensils are often made of these materials?
home insulation prevents the transfer of cold into the house	Do thats why pot handles and cooking utensils are often made of these materials?
warmer air rises because it is less dense than cooler air	Do you can learn more about convection currents by watching "Convection" at this URL:?
all objects radiate thermal energy	Do in fact, when a room is full of people, it may feel noticeably warmer because of all the thermal energy the people radiate! To learn more about thermal radiation, watch "Radiation" at the URL below?
convection currents carry thermal energy from the sun to earth	Do in fact, when a room is full of people, it may feel noticeably warmer because of all the thermal energy the people radiate! To learn more about thermal radiation, watch "Radiation" at the URL below?
fluid particles with more energy have greater density	Do you can learn more about convection currents by watching "Convection" at this URL:?
metals are excellent thermal conductors because they have freely moving electrons	Do 6, the metal heating element of the curling iron heats up almost instantly and quickly transfers energy to the strands of hair that it touches?
a land breeze is an example of a convection current	Do you can learn more about convection currents by watching "Convection" at this URL:?
thermal energy is transferred from a space heater to a person in front of it by conduction	Do in fact, when a room is full of people, it may feel noticeably warmer because of all the thermal energy the people radiate! To learn more about thermal radiation, watch "Radiation" at the URL below?
the function of a thermostat is to transfer thermal energy	Do two basic types of combustion engines are external and internal combustion engines?
the water in a hotwater heating system is heated by a furnace	Do you can watch an animation showing how a solar heating system works at this URL:?
in a warmair heating system pipes carry thermal energy throughout the house	Do you can watch an animation showing how a solar heating system works at this URL:?
thermal energy from inside a refrigerator changes the refrigerant to a gas	Do as a gas, it releases thermal energy to the warm air outside the refrigerator and changes back to a liquid?
a combustion engine burns fuel to produce thermal energy	Do two basic types of combustion engines are external and internal combustion engines?
in any combustion engine the engine does the work of moving a piston	Do two basic types of combustion engines are external and internal combustion engines?
in a warmair heating system warmair vents are always placed near the ceiling	Do you can watch an animation showing how a solar heating system works at this URL:?
an air conditioner is an example of a cooling system	Do as a gas, it releases thermal energy to the warm air outside the refrigerator and changes back to a liquid?
refrigerant changes to a liquid in the condenser of a refrigerator	Do as a gas, it releases thermal energy to the warm air outside the refrigerator and changes back to a liquid?
steam ships have internal combustion engines	Do two basic types of combustion engines are external and internal combustion engines?
the purpose of a radiator in a heating system is to produce thermal energy	Do two basic types of combustion engines are external and internal combustion engines?
substance that absorbs and releases thermal energy in a cooling system	Do two basic types of combustion engines are external and internal combustion engines?
warm air moves through the ducts of heating system because of gravity	Do in the furnace, the cold air is heated, and the cycle repeats?
device in a heating system that controls the furnace or boiler	Do in the furnace, the cold air is heated, and the cycle repeats?
complex machine that produces thermal energy outside the machine and uses the thermal energy to do	Do two basic types of combustion engines are external and internal combustion engines?
the transfer of thermal energy can be used to keep things cool	Do two basic types of combustion engines are external and internal combustion engines?
heating system that includes a boiler pipes and radiators	Do when it finally returns to the boiler, it is heated again and the cycle repeats?
thermal energy naturally moves from a warmer area to a cooler area	Do two basic types of combustion engines are external and internal combustion engines?
the piston of a combustion engine moves because the crankshaft turns	Do two basic types of combustion engines are external and internal combustion engines?
complex machine that produces thermal energy inside the machine and uses the thermal energy to do work	Do two basic types of combustion engines are external and internal combustion engines?
refrigerator or air conditioner	Do as a gas, it releases thermal energy to the warm air outside the refrigerator and changes back to a liquid?
heating system that includes a furnace ducts and vents	Do in the furnace, the cold air is heated, and the cycle repeats?
a mechanical wave starts with a disturbance in matter	Do in this case, the energy comes from the falling drop of water?
particles of matter actually travel along with a mechanical wave	Do all three types are described in detail below?
transverse waves travel only through solid matter	Do all three types are described in detail below?
ocean waves travel deep below the surface of the water	Do all three types are described in detail below?
earthquakes cause longitudinal waves	Do they are illustrated in Figure 19.7?
the medium of a mechanical wave must be a solid or liquid	Do as the particles vibrate, they pass the energy of the disturbance to the particles next to them, which pass the energy to the particles next to them, and so on?
in a surface wave particles of the medium move only up and down	Do the high points are called crests, and the low points are called troughs?
ocean waves crash on shore when the bottoms of the waves slow down due to friction	Do the crashing waves carry water onto the shore as surf?
in a surface wave particles of matter move in a circular motion	Do the high points are called crests, and the low points are called troughs?
all waves transfer energy from one place to another	Do all three types are described in detail below?
a primary p wave is a longitudinal wave	Do they are illustrated in Figure 19.7?
all waves must travel through matter	Do all three types are described in detail below?
all mechanical waves are either transverse or longitudinal waves	Do all three types are described in detail below?
some waves do not require a medium	Do all three types are described in detail below?
a source of energy is needed to start a mechanical wave	Do in this case, the energy comes from the falling drop of water?
disturbance in matter that transfers energy from place to place	Do in this case, the energy comes from the falling drop of water?
part of a longitudinal wave where particles of the medium are spread farthest apart	Do compressions are the places where the coils are crowded together, and rarefactions are the places where the coils are spread apart?
wave in which particles of the medium vibrate at right angles to the direction that the wave travels	Do the high points are called crests, and the low points are called troughs?
combined transverse and longitudinal wave	Do all three types are described in detail below?
part of a transverse wave where particles of the medium are lowest	Do the high points are called crests, and the low points are called troughs?
wave in which particles of the medium vibrate in the same direction that the wave travels	Do the high points are called crests, and the low points are called troughs?
matter through which a mechanical wave travels	Do in this case, the energy comes from the falling drop of water?
the less compressed particles of matter become in a longitudinal wave the greater the waves amplitude	Do html?
the distance between two adjacent compressions of a longitudinal wave is its wavelength	Do you can see examples of waves with shorter and longer wavelengths in Figure 19.12?
the frequency of a wave is the same as the frequency of the vibrations that caused the wave	Do this takes more energy, so a higher-frequency wave has more energy than a lower-frequency wave with the same amplitude?
wave speed measures the same thing as wave frequency	Do html?
wavelength equals wave speed multiplied by wave frequency	Do what is its wavelength?
the resting position of particles in a longitudinal wave is where the particles are most spread out	Do these waves are high-amplitude waves?
a wave caused by a disturbance with greater energy has greater amplitude	Do these waves are high-amplitude waves?
if you know the speed and wavelength of a wave you can calculate its frequency	Do what is its wavelength?
waves generally travel most slowly in gases	Do when particles are farther apart, it takes longer for the energy of the disturbance to pass from particle to particle?
a wave with a higher frequency always has a greater speed than a wave with a lower frequency	Do this takes more energy, so a higher-frequency wave has more energy than a lower-frequency wave with the same amplitude?
one measure of wave size is wave frequency	Do html?
the resting position of a transverse wave is called a trough	Do these waves are high-amplitude waves?
if you know only a waves amplitude and wavelength you can calculate its speed	Do html?
wave speed and wavelength have an inverse relationship	Do html?
a tsunami is an ocean wave with an unusually great amplitude	Do html?
maximum distance the particles of a medium move from their resting position	Do these waves are high-amplitude waves?
number of waves that pass a fixed point in a given amount of time	Do how quickly you move the rope determines the frequency of the waves?
how far a wave travels in a given amount of time	Do what is its wavelength?
highest point reached by particles of the medium in a transverse wave	Do these waves are high-amplitude waves?
distance between two corresponding points on adjacent waves	Do you can see examples of waves with shorter and longer wavelengths in Figure 19.12?
location of particles of the medium in the absence of a wave	Do these waves are high-amplitude waves?
si unit for wave frequency	Do this takes more energy, so a higher-frequency wave has more energy than a lower-frequency wave with the same amplitude?
reflection occurs only with sound waves	Do edu/phys_anim/waves/em?
all reflected waves appear to be standing still	Do try it yourself and see if the wave appears to stand still?
the angle of incidence is always greater than the angle of reflection	Do edu/phys_anim/waves/em?
reflected waves have the same speed as the original waves before they were reflected	Do this is illustrated in Figure 19.16?
diffraction is more pronounced with sound waves than light waves	Do diffraction is major if the length of the obstacle or opening is less than the wavelength?
diffraction occurs because waves travel at different speeds in different media	Do this causes it to refract when it passes from air to water?
wave interference occurs whenever waves enter a new medium	Do edu/phys_anim/waves/em?
wave interference occurs only when a wave is reflected	Do edu/phys_anim/waves/em?
you can hear sounds around the corner of a building because the sound waves are refracted	Do diffraction is major if the length of the obstacle or opening is less than the wavelength?
light waves refract when they pass from air to water	Do edu/phys_anim/waves/em?
destructive interference decreases the amplitude of waves	Do ed?
a standing wave forms when a wave is refracted	Do try it yourself and see if the wave appears to stand still?
interference occurs only when the crests of one wave overlap with the troughs of another wave	Do ed?
a standing wave occurs when a wave is reflected straight back from an obstacle	Do try it yourself and see if the wave appears to stand still?
wave interference always changes the speed of a wave	Do edu/phys_anim/waves/em?
change in direction of waves as they enter a new medium at an angle	Do this causes it to refract when it passes from air to water?
bouncing back of waves from a barrier	Do for animations of the three types of wave interactions, go to this URL:?
any interaction of waves with other waves	Do for animations of the three types of wave interactions, go to this URL:?
situation in which crests of one wave overlap crests of another wave	Do edu/phys_anim/waves/em?
any interaction of waves with matter	Do for animations of the three types of wave interactions, go to this URL:?
spreading out of waves as they pass around a barrier	Do edu/phys_anim/waves/em?
situation in which crests of one wave overlap troughs of another wave	Do ed?
all sounds begin with vibrations in matter	Do you can see an animation of sound waves moving through air at this URL:?
sound waves generally travel most quickly through gases	Do properties of sound include speed, loudness, and pitch?
sounds can travel through air and water but not through solids	Do why does a tree make sound when it crashes to the ground? How does the sound reach peoples ears if they happen to be in the forest? And in general, how do sounds get started, and how do they travel? Keep reading to find out?
sound waves travel more quickly in warm air than cold air	Do properties of sound include speed, loudness, and pitch?
the amount of water vapor in the air affects the speed of sound through air	Do properties of sound include speed, loudness, and pitch?
sounds that are too high in frequency for humans to hear are called infrasound	Do why does a tree make sound when it crashes to the ground? How does the sound reach peoples ears if they happen to be in the forest? And in general, how do sounds get started, and how do they travel? Keep reading to find out?
as distance from a sound source increases the area covered by the sound waves decreases	Do properties of sound include speed, loudness, and pitch?
as the decibel level of sounds gets higher the pitch of the sounds always gets higher	Do properties of sound include speed, loudness, and pitch?
the intensity of sound waves is the same regardless of distance from the sound source	Do properties of sound include speed, loudness, and pitch?
some animals can hear sounds with frequencies as high as 100000 hz	Do why does a tree make sound when it crashes to the ground? How does the sound reach peoples ears if they happen to be in the forest? And in general, how do sounds get started, and how do they travel? Keep reading to find out?
how loud or soft a sound seems to a listener	Do properties of sound include speed, loudness, and pitch?
sounds with frequencies above 20000 hertz	Do why does a tree make sound when it crashes to the ground? How does the sound reach peoples ears if they happen to be in the forest? And in general, how do sounds get started, and how do they travel? Keep reading to find out?
unit of sound intensity	Do properties of sound include speed, loudness, and pitch?
how high or low a sound seems to a listener	Do properties of sound include speed, loudness, and pitch?
transfer of energy from a vibrating object in waves that travel through matter	Do properties of sound include speed, loudness, and pitch?
sounds with frequencies below 20 hertz	Do why does a tree make sound when it crashes to the ground? How does the sound reach peoples ears if they happen to be in the forest? And in general, how do sounds get started, and how do they travel? Keep reading to find out?
measure of the amount of energy in sound waves	Do properties of sound include speed, loudness, and pitch?
bones in the ear canal transmit sound waves to the middle ear	Do the arrangement of the three bones allows them to work together as a lever that increases the amplitude of the waves as they pass to the inner ear?
the stirrup passes amplified sound waves to the oval window	Do only after the nerve impulses reach the brain do we hear the sound?
we hear sound as soon as sound waves reach the middle ear	Do only after the nerve impulses reach the brain do we hear the sound?
most adults experience at least some hearing loss as they get older	Do however, this type of hearing loss can be prevented by protecting the ears from loud sounds?
the most common cause of hearing loss is exposure to loud sounds	Do however, this type of hearing loss can be prevented by protecting the ears from loud sounds?
longterm exposure to loud sounds is needed to damage hearing	Do however, this type of hearing loss can be prevented by protecting the ears from loud sounds?
many home and yard chores are loud enough to cause hearing loss	Do however, this type of hearing loss can be prevented by protecting the ears from loud sounds?
electronic hearing protectors reduce the amplitude of highamplitude sound waves	Do this type of hearing protector is recommended for higher noise levels and situations where its important to be able to hear lower-decibel sounds?
the brain interprets nerve impulses from the ears as sounds	Do however, this type of hearing loss can be prevented by protecting the ears from loud sounds?
materials used for earplugs include silicon and polyurethane foam	Do many home and yard chores and even recreational activities are loud enough to cause hearing loss if people are exposed to them for very long?
the brain plays an essential role in hearing	Do however, this type of hearing loss can be prevented by protecting the ears from loud sounds?
part of the ear that extends outward from the head	Do the eardrum vibrates when sound waves strike it, and it sends the vibrations on to the middle ear?
the most common cause of hearing loss is damage to the eardrum	Do however, this type of hearing loss can be prevented by protecting the ears from loud sounds?
any of three tiny bones in the middle ear	Do the arrangement of the three bones allows them to work together as a lever that increases the amplitude of the waves as they pass to the inner ear?
fluidfilled structure in the inner ear that is lined with hair cells	Do only after the nerve impulses reach the brain do we hear the sound?
the role of hearing protectors is to keep foreign objects out of the ears	Do however, this type of hearing loss can be prevented by protecting the ears from loud sounds?
tube that carries sound waves into the ear	Do the eardrum vibrates when sound waves strike it, and it sends the vibrations on to the middle ear?
the eardrum is the first structure of the ear to vibrate when sound waves strike it	Do the eardrum vibrates when sound waves strike it, and it sends the vibrations on to the middle ear?
waves in cochlear fluid bend the hairlike projections of hair cells	Do only after the nerve impulses reach the brain do we hear the sound?
membrane in the outer ear that vibrates when sound waves strike it	Do the eardrum vibrates when sound waves strike it, and it sends the vibrations on to the middle ear?
tiny structure in the inner ear that changes vibrations to nerve impulses	Do only after the nerve impulses reach the brain do we hear the sound?
part of the ear that transmits and amplifies vibrations from the eardrum	Do the arrangement of the three bones allows them to work together as a lever that increases the amplitude of the waves as they pass to the inner ear?
use of ultrasound to locate underwater objects	Do 13 and the animation at the URL below show how a bat uses echolocation to locate insect prey?
use of ultrasound to examine structures inside the body	Do you can see an animation showing how ultrasonography works at this URL:?
sound with a frequency higher than 20000 hertz	Do uses include echolocation, sonar, and ultrasonography?
use of ultrasound by animals to locate objects they cannot see	Do 13 and the animation at the URL below show how a bat uses echolocation to locate insect prey?
vibration of an object in response to sound waves of a certain frequency	Do in Figure?
how high or low a sound seems to a listener	Do uRL:?
all musical instruments create sound by causing a reed to vibrate	Do in Figure?
smaller drums produce higherfrequency sound waves than larger drums	Do uRL:?
ultrasound has frequencies lower than 20 hertz	Do uses include echolocation, sonar, and ultrasonography?
ultrasonography has been used to determine the depth of the ocean	Do uses include echolocation, sonar, and ultrasonography?
animals that use echolocation include bats and whales	Do 13 and the animation at the URL below show how a bat uses echolocation to locate insect prey?
the earliest musical instruments date back to about 1900	Do in Figure?
all musical instruments make sound in the same general way	Do in Figure?
instruments use resonance to make sounds higher in pitch	Do in Figure?
a saxophone makes sound when the musician blows across a thin piece of wood	Do uRL:?
some animals use reflected sound waves to locate prey	Do 13 and the animation at the URL below show how a bat uses echolocation to locate insect prey?
sonar works on the same principle as echolocation	Do uses include echolocation, sonar, and ultrasonography?
the only use of ultrasonography is to create images of unborn babies	Do you can see an animation showing how ultrasonography works at this URL:?
when a charged particle vibrates it causes the electric field around it to vibrate	Do uRL:?
the two fields of an electromagnetic wave occur at right angles to each other	Do therefore, an electromagnetic wave is a transverse wave?
both fields of an electromagnetic wave vibrate in the same direction that the wave travels	Do therefore, an electromagnetic wave is a transverse wave?
the waveparticle theory explains the difference between electromagnetic and mechanical waves	Do the higher the frequency is, the more energy a photon has?
electromagnetic waves cannot travel through matter	Do this is similar to the way a sound wave spreads out and becomes less intense farther from the sound source?
a vibrating electric field generates a charged particle	Do like a magnetic field, an electric field can exert force on objects over a distance without actually touching them?
electromagnetic waves may spread out and travel around obstacles	Do this is similar to the way a sound wave spreads out and becomes less intense farther from the sound source?
when electrons return to lower energy levels they give off particles of matter	Do the higher the frequency is, the more energy a photon has?
all electromagnetic radiation is dangerous except for light	Do therefore, an electromagnetic wave is a transverse wave?
electromagnetic waves are used for communications cooking and medicine	Do "?
electromagnetic radiation provides the energy that plants need for photosynthesis	Do "?
an electromagnetic wave gains energy as it travels across space	Do therefore, an electromagnetic wave is a transverse wave?
the human eye can detect all frequencies of electromagnetic waves	Do this is similar to the way a sound wave spreads out and becomes less intense farther from the sound source?
all of the suns electromagnetic radiation travels to earth	Do therefore, an electromagnetic wave is a transverse wave?
einstein explained how light can behave both as a wave and as a particle	Do the higher the frequency is, the more energy a photon has?
transfer of energy by waves such as radio waves and light	Do "?
explanation for how light can behave as both a wave and a particle	Do the higher the frequency is, the more energy a photon has?
invisible area of force surrounding a charged particle	Do like a magnetic field, an electric field can exert force on objects over a distance without actually touching them?
wave in which vibrations occur at right angles to the direction the wave travels	Do therefore, an electromagnetic wave is a transverse wave?
packet of electromagnetic energy	Do the higher the frequency is, the more energy a photon has?
wave that consists of vibrating electric and magnetic fields	Do therefore, an electromagnetic wave is a transverse wave?
invisible area of force surrounding a magnet	Do like a magnetic field, an electric field can exert force on objects over a distance without actually touching them?
some electromagnetic waves are extremely harmful	Do although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency?
all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed across space	Do although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency?
it takes electromagnetic radiation 93 minutes to reach earth from the sun	Do com/discovery/29407-assignme?
all electromagnetic waves have the same wavelength	Do although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency?
electromagnetic waves travel more quickly through a medium than they do across space	Do although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency?
the frequencies of electromagnetic waves range from 1 to 100 hertz	Do although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency?
the highestfrequency electromagnetic waves may have frequencies of trillions of hertz	Do although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency?
the frequency of an electromagnetic wave is inversely related to its wavelength	Do although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency?
light is diffracted when it passes from air to water at an angle	Do com/discovery/29407-assignme?
light has a faster speed across space than do any other wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation	Do although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency?
electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed in all media	Do although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency?
if you know only the wavelength of an electromagnetic wave you can calculate its frequency	Do although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency?
distance between corresponding points of adjacent waves	Do higher frequency waves have greater energy?
fastest known speed in the universe	Do although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency?
matter through which an electromagnetic wave may travel	Do although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency?
number of waves that pass a fixed point in a given amount of time	Do although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency?
example of electromagnetic radiation	Do although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency?
value that equals wavelength multiplied by wave frequency	Do although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency?
radio waves have the least amount of energy of all electromagnetic waves	Do this makes them potentially very harmful, but it also makes them useful for certain purposes?
visible light has higherfrequency waves than ultraviolet light	Do 7, you can see where these different types of light waves fall in the electromagnetic spectrum?
cell phone transmissions are carried by microwaves	Do uRL:?
radar stands for radio detection and recovery	Do uRL:?
visible light consists of a very wide range of wavelengths	Do 7, you can see where these different types of light waves fall in the electromagnetic spectrum?
you should protect your skin from ultraviolet light even on cloudy days	Do uRL:?
the only use of x rays is to make images of bones and teeth inside the body	Do this makes them potentially very harmful, but it also makes them useful for certain purposes?
gamma rays cannot pass through bones and teeth	Do this makes them potentially very harmful, but it also makes them useful for certain purposes?
gamma rays can be used to destroy cancer cells	Do uRL:?
radar is used for tracking storms	Do uRL:?
ultraviolet light has shorter wavelengths than visible light	Do 7, you can see where these different types of light waves fall in the electromagnetic spectrum?
television broadcasts cannot pass through the ionosphere	Do when the waves are received by television sets, they are decoded and changed back to sounds and pictures?
television broadcasts encode pictures with amplitude modulation	Do when the waves are received by television sets, they are decoded and changed back to sounds and pictures?
infrared light is used to sterilize surgical instruments	Do 7, you can see where these different types of light waves fall in the electromagnetic spectrum?
x rays cannot pass through lead	Do this makes them potentially very harmful, but it also makes them useful for certain purposes?
electromagnetic waves with the greatest energy	Do this makes them potentially very harmful, but it also makes them useful for certain purposes?
full range of wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation	Do 7, you can see where these different types of light waves fall in the electromagnetic spectrum?
electromagnetic waves with wavelengths between infrared and ultraviolet light	Do 7, you can see where these different types of light waves fall in the electromagnetic spectrum?
light with the shortest wavelengths	Do you can learn more about visible light in the chapter "Visible Light" and at the URL below?
electromagnetic waves with the longest wavelengths	Do this makes them potentially very harmful, but it also makes them useful for certain purposes?
light with the longest wavelengths	Do you can learn more about visible light in the chapter "Visible Light" and at the URL below?
radio waves with the highest frequencies	Do 7, you can see where these different types of light waves fall in the electromagnetic spectrum?
referring to matter that allows all visible light to pass through	Do how light interacts with matter depends on the type of matter?
production of visible light in a way that does not require high temperatures	Do how light interacts with matter depends on the type of matter?
referring to matter that does not allow visible light to pass through it	Do how light interacts with matter depends on the type of matter?
production of visible light by an object that is so hot it glows	Do how light interacts with matter depends on the type of matter?
passage of light through matter	Do but how does the sun produce light? Read on to find out?
referring to matter that transmits but scatters visible light	Do how light interacts with matter depends on the type of matter?
substance that colors materials by reflecting light of certain wavelengths and absorbing light of other	Do they are the only colors needed for full-color printing?
a luminous object is an object that appears to glow because it is reflecting light from another source	Do everything you can see that doesnt produce its own light is illuminated?
some minerals produce visible light when they absorb ultraviolet light	Do how light interacts with matter depends on the type of matter?
a neon light produces violet or blue light	Do only a few colors of light are represented in the figure?
an object that reflects all the light that strikes it is opaque	Do how light interacts with matter depends on the type of matter?
fireflies glow with visible light because of chemical reactions	Do how light interacts with matter depends on the type of matter?
all plants use visible light to make food by photosynthesis	Do how light interacts with matter depends on the type of matter?
the moon is an example of a luminescent object	Do it is the absence of light?
the filament of an incandescent light bulb glows because it gets extremely hot	Do this type of light is very reliable and durable?
an led light produces visible light by fluorescence	Do how light interacts with matter depends on the type of matter?
you can see clearly through an object that is translucent	Do it is the absence of light?
a rainbow occurs because raindrops separate light into its different wavelengths	Do org/wiki/File:Light_dispersion_conce?
an apple appears red because it absorbs only red light	Do it is the absence of light?
the bluish green color called cyan is a secondary color of light	Do you can explore the colors of visible light and how they combine with the interactive animations at this URL:?
combining red green and blue light produces light that appears to be black	Do you can explore the colors of visible light and how they combine with the interactive animations at this URL:?
the primary colors of pigments are the same as the primary colors of light	Do they are the only colors needed for full-color printing?
formation of a clear image by light reflected from a very smooth surface	Do this is why diffuse reflection forms, at best, a blurry image?
device that produces a very focused beam of light of just one wavelength	Do optical fibers are used to carry telephone, cable TV, and Internet signals?
curving outward like the outside of a bowl	Do they give the driver a wider view of the area around the vehicle than a plane mirror would?
copy of an object that is formed by reflected or refracted light	Do an image is a copy of an object that is formed by reflected or refracted light?
formation of a blurry image by light reflected from a rough surface	Do this is why diffuse reflection forms, at best, a blurry image?
curving inward like the inside of a bowl	Do they are also used in some telescopes?
study of visible light and the ways it can be used	Do an image is a copy of an object that is formed by reflected or refracted light?
moving the lens of a camera controls the amount of light that enters the camera	Do for a series of animations showing how a camera works, go to this URL:?
a laser beam consists of photons of light of a single wavelength	Do optical fibers are used to carry telephone, cable TV, and Internet signals?
a reflecting telescope does not refract light	Do optical instruments include micro- scopes, telescopes, cameras, and lasers?
magnifications of all the lenses of a microscope are added to yield the overall magnification of the	Do uRL:?
light refracts when it enters a new medium at an angle other than 90 	Do this is illustrated in Figure change in speed, the more light bends?
only mirrors reflect light and form images	Do optical instruments include micro- scopes, telescopes, cameras, and lasers?
all mirrors can form virtual images	Do almost all plane mirrors reverse left and right in this way?
the image formed by a plane mirror looks exactly like the object in every way	Do almost all plane mirrors reverse left and right in this way?
the focal point of a concave mirror is the point in front of the mirror where reflected rays intersect	Do they are also used in some telescopes?
a concave mirror can form only virtual images	Do almost all plane mirrors reverse left and right in this way?
the image formed by a convex mirror is always upright and reduced in size	Do almost all plane mirrors reverse left and right in this way?
light travels more quickly through glass than through air	Do this is illustrated in Figure change in speed, the more light bends?
the more curved the surface of a lens is the more it refracts light	Do like mirrors, lenses may be concave or convex?
the lens in a camera is a convex lens	Do like mirrors, lenses may be concave or convex?
a refracting telescope uses a convex lens to collect and focus light	Do an example of a convex lens is a hand lens?
one function of the cornea is to protect the eye	Do the lenses focus images farther forward in the eye, so they are on the retina instead of behind it?
the role of the pupil is to help focus light	Do the brain also tells us what we are seeing?
images formed by the eye are upright and virtual	Do the lenses focus images farther forward in the eye, so they are on the retina instead of behind it?
we can see only if information from the eyes reaches the brain	Do the brain also tells us what we are seeing?
rods can sense dim light but not colors of light	Do the optic nerve carries electrical signals from the rods and cones to the brain?
the eyes and brain work together to enable vision	Do the brain also tells us what we are seeing?
the pupil helps to focus light that enters the eye	Do the brain also tells us what we are seeing?
the lens changes shape to focus images of close or distant objects	Do the brain also tells us what we are seeing?
there are two different types of rods in the retina	Do the optic nerve carries electrical signals from the rods and cones to the brain?
the brain interprets signals from the retina as shape color and brightness	Do the brain also tells us what we are seeing?
the brain interprets images on the retina as though they were upright	Do the brain also tells us what we are seeing?
laser surgery corrects vision problems by changing the shape of the lens	Do the lenses focus images farther forward in the eye, so they are on the retina instead of behind it?
the role of the iris is to control the size of the pupil	Do the optic nerve carries electrical signals from the rods and cones to the brain?
the lens normally focuses images on the optic nerve	Do the brain also tells us what we are seeing?
hyperopia is also called nearsightedness	Do the lenses focus images farther forward in the eye, so they are on the retina instead of behind it?
nerve cell in the retina that senses dim light	Do the brain also tells us what we are seeing?
colored part of the eye	Do the brain also tells us what we are seeing?
opening at the front of the eye that lets in light	Do the optic nerve carries electrical signals from the rods and cones to the brain?
nerve cell in the retina that senses colors of light	Do the brain also tells us what we are seeing?
organ specialized to collect light and focus images	Do the brain also tells us what we are seeing?
transparent outer covering of the eye	Do the optic nerve carries electrical signals from the rods and cones to the brain?
membrane lining the back of the eye	Do the optic nerve carries electrical signals from the rods and cones to the brain?
some magnets have just one magnetic pole	Do north and south poles of two magnets attract each other, while two north poles or two south poles repel each other?
bringing together the north poles of two magnets demagnetizes them	Do north and south poles of two magnets attract each other, while two north poles or two south poles repel each other?
a magnet will attract any material that contains iron	Do north and south poles of two magnets attract each other, while two north poles or two south poles repel each other?
an atom is a tiny magnet because its electrons spin around its nucleus	Do they include iron, cobalt, and nickel?
only ferromagnetic materials are affected by magnetic force	Do north and south poles of two magnets attract each other, while two north poles or two south poles repel each other?
copper and aluminum are attracted by magnets	Do they include iron, cobalt, and nickel?
for a ferromagnetic material to become magnetic its magnetic domains must be aligned	Do they include iron, cobalt, and nickel?
iron is the only ferromagnetic material	Do like all magnets, this bar magnet has north and south poles and attracts objects such as paper clips that contain iron?
only temporary magnets can be demagnetized	Do these actions move the magnetic domains out of alignment?
while paper clips are clinging to a bar magnet they are temporary magnets	Do like all magnets, this bar magnet has north and south poles and attracts objects such as paper clips that contain iron?
the most magnetic material in nature is magnetite	Do obviously, only certain materials respond to magnetic force?
an iron nail can be turned into a permanent magnet	Do like all magnets, this bar magnet has north and south poles and attracts objects such as paper clips that contain iron?
permanent magnets can never be demagnetized	Do these actions move the magnetic domains out of alignment?
magnetite is a naturally occurring permanent magnet	Do north and south poles of two magnets attract each other, while two north poles or two south poles repel each other?
the magnetic properties of lodestone were discovered only recently	Do north and south poles of two magnets attract each other, while two north poles or two south poles repel each other?
force of attraction or repulsion exerted by a magnet	Do north and south poles of two magnets attract each other, while two north poles or two south poles repel each other?
object that attracts ferromagnetic materials	Do like all magnets, this bar magnet has north and south poles and attracts objects such as paper clips that contain iron?
iron nickel or cobalt	Do like all magnets, this bar magnet has north and south poles and attracts objects such as paper clips that contain iron?
north or south end of a magnet	Do north and south poles of two magnets attract each other, while two north poles or two south poles repel each other?
area around a magnet where it exerts force	Do north and south poles of two magnets attract each other, while two north poles or two south poles repel each other?
ability of a material to respond to and exert magnetic force	Do obviously, only certain materials respond to magnetic force?
area of a ferromagnetic material where the poles of atoms are aligned in the same direction	Do they include iron, cobalt, and nickel?
the north end of a compass needle always points to 90 north latitude	Do because its close to the geographic north pole, it would be confusing to call it the magnetic south pole?
earths magnetic field extends outward from the planet in all directions	Do uRL:?
earths magnetic poles have switched places many times over the past hundred years	Do like a bar magnet, Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field?
once molten rocks harden their magnetic domains are frozen in place forever	Do what might happen if a magnetic reversal occurred in your lifetime? How might it affect you? You can learn more about Earths magnetic reversals at this URL:?
earths outer core is made up mainly of iron and nickel	Do uRL:?
charged particles move inside earth when it spins on its axis	Do like a bar magnet, Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field?
harmful particles from the sun are repelled by earths magnetic poles	Do like a bar magnet, Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field?
magnetic reversals were discovered by william gilbert in 1600	Do uRL:?
earths south magnetic pole is the same as earths south geographic pole	Do because its close to the geographic north pole, it would be confusing to call it the magnetic south pole?
migrating birds may detect earths magnetic field with structures in their eyes	Do like a bar magnet, Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field?
earth has north and south magnetic poles like a bar magnet	Do like a bar magnet, Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field?
earths magnetic and geographic poles are located in the same places	Do like a bar magnet, Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field?
scientists no longer accept the idea of magnetic reversals	Do uRL:?
earths magnetic field occurs only over the north and south poles	Do like a bar magnet, Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field?
earths magnetic force is exerted over a distance	Do like a bar magnet, Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field?
about 80 north latitude	Do because its close to the geographic north pole, it would be confusing to call it the magnetic south pole?
solid sphere that makes up earths center	Do like a bar magnet, Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field?
exactly 90 north latitude	Do because its close to the geographic north pole, it would be confusing to call it the magnetic south pole?
region deep inside earth that consists of liquid metals	Do uRL:?
earths magnetic field	Do like a bar magnet, Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field?
switching of earths north and south magnetic poles	Do like a bar magnet, Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field?
navigation device that always points north	Do because its close to the geographic north pole, it would be confusing to call it the magnetic south pole?
homogeneous mixture in which particles are too small to be seen	Do but they are too small to settle or filter out of the mixture?
combination of two or more substances in any proportions	Do uRL:?
homogeneous mixture in which particles are big enough to reflect light	Do but they are too small to settle or filter out of the mixture?
heterogeneous mixture	Do one sample might have more raisins, another might have more nuts?
unique substance that forms when two or more elements combine chemically	Do uRL:?
rigid latticelike framework of many ions bonded together	Do you can actually watch crystals forming in this video:?
pure substance that cannot be separated into any other substances	Do uRL:?
atoms of the same element are all alike	Do all gold atoms have the same structure and properties?
each compound has a unique set of properties	Do how could you use this property to separate iron objects from nickel objects?
atoms can be seen with a hand lens	Do all gold atoms have the same structure and properties?
there are millions of different elements in the universe	Do uRL:?
a crystal consists of molecules that are bonded together	Do you can actually watch crystals forming in this video:?
each element has a unique set of properties	Do how could you use this property to separate iron objects from nickel objects?
the idea of elements was first introduced by john dalton	Do all gold atoms have the same structure and properties?
most elements are found in compounds	Do uRL:?
a compound has the same properties as the substances it contains	Do but together, sodium and chlorine form a harmless, unreactive compound that you can safely sprinkle on food?
a molecule consists of two or more atoms	Do you can actually watch crystals forming in this video:?
table salt is an example of a compound that forms molecules	Do you can actually watch crystals forming in this video:?
the substances in a mixture may be elements or compounds	Do other examples are pictured in Figure 3.12?
a package of mixed seeds is a homogeneous mixture	Do one sample might have more raisins, another might have more nuts?
mixtures are classified on the basis of particle size	Do all gold atoms have the same structure and properties?
components of mixtures rarely can be separated	Do uRL:?
electrically neutral atomic particle inside the nucleus of an atom	Do for example, a carbon atom has six electrons that "cancel out" its six protons?
atom that differs in its number of neutrons from other atoms of the same element	Do however, the number of neutrons may vary, and the number of electrons can change?
negatively charged atomic particle that moves around the nucleus of an atom	Do this is also shown in Figure 5.2?
positively charged atomic particle inside the nucleus of an atom	Do this is also shown in Figure 5.2?
type of particle that makes up protons and neutrons	Do however, the number of neutrons may vary, and the number of electrons can change?
charged particle that forms when atom gains or loses electrons	Do however, the number of neutrons may vary, and the number of electrons can change?
tiny region at the center of an atom that contains protons and neutrons	Do however, the number of neutrons may vary, and the number of electrons can change?
all protons are exactly the same	Do however, the number of neutrons may vary, and the number of electrons can change?
electrons have the same mass as protons	Do however, the number of neutrons may vary, and the number of electrons can change?
atoms may be positive or negative in charge	Do for example, a carbon atom has six electrons that "cancel out" its six protons?
all atoms of a given element have the same number of electrons	Do however, the number of neutrons may vary, and the number of electrons can change?
there are three quarks in each neutron	Do this is because the quarks are held together by very strange particles called gluons?
atoms are the smallest particles of matter	Do cuny?
an atom always has the same number of electrons as neutrons	Do however, the number of neutrons may vary, and the number of electrons can change?
the nucleus is at the center of the atom	Do however, the number of neutrons may vary, and the number of electrons can change?
atoms have no electric charge	Do this is also shown in Figure 5.2?
the strong force keeps electrons moving around the nucleus	Do however, the number of neutrons may vary, and the number of electrons can change?
electrons have almost no mass	Do however, the number of neutrons may vary, and the number of electrons can change?
the mass of an atom equals the sum of its protons and neutrons	Do however, the number of neutrons may vary, and the number of electrons can change?
for most elements isotopes are named for their atomic number	Do it is used by scientists to estimate the ages of rocks and fossils?
each proton consists of three quarks	Do this is because the quarks are held together by very strange particles called gluons?
quarks are held together by gluons	Do this is because the quarks are held together by very strange particles called gluons?
scientist who discovered electrons	Do you can learn more about Thomson and his discovery at this online exhibit:?
philosopher who thought the idea of the atom was ridiculous	Do in fact, Aristotle thought?
thomsons atomic model	Do it shows the atom as a sphere of positive charge (the pudding) with negative electrons (the plums) scattered through it?
thomson aimed a beam of alpha particles at gold foil	Do it happened only in very small areas at the centers of the gold atoms?
philosopher who introduced the idea of the atom	Do in fact, Aristotle thought?
the plums in the plum pudding model represent protons	Do it shows the atom as a sphere of positive charge (the pudding) with negative electrons (the plums) scattered through it?
rutherfords atomic model	Do you can see it in Figure 5.13?
scientist who developed atomic theory	Do scientists now know that atoms consist of even smaller particles?
the planets in the planetary model represent electrons	Do you can see it in Figure 5.13?
scientist who discovered the nucleus	Do uRL:?
the first subatomic particle to be discovered was the proton	Do you can learn more about Thomson and his discovery at this online exhibit:?
dalton thought that all substances are made of atoms	Do scientists now know that atoms consist of even smaller particles?
aristotle rejected democrituss idea of the atom	Do in fact, Aristotle thought?
dalton thought that atoms could be created or destroyed	Do scientists now know that atoms consist of even smaller particles?
daltons atomic theory was later completely rejected	Do scientists now know that atoms consist of even smaller particles?
ernest rutherford discovered neutrons	Do uRL:?
thomson showed that electric charge is carried by particles of matter	Do it shows the atom as a sphere of positive charge (the pudding) with negative electrons (the plums) scattered through it?
the pudding in the plum pudding model represents positive charge	Do it shows the atom as a sphere of positive charge (the pudding) with negative electrons (the plums) scattered through it?
democritus represented atoms with solid wooden balls	Do models including these smaller particles were later developed?
in the gold foil experiments most of the alpha particles were deflected backward from the gold foil	Do it happened only in very small areas at the centers of the gold atoms?
dalton was the first scientist to observe atoms with a microscope	Do uRL:?
electrons flow through a vacuum tube from the negative end to the positive end	Do the negative particles were later named electrons?
the focus of bohrs research was the nucleus	Do 14 shows Bohrs model of the atom?
bohr rejected modern atomic theory	Do 14 shows Bohrs model of the atom?
there is a maximum of two energy levels in an atom	Do you can learn more about orbitals and their electrons at the URL below:?
electrons fall toward the nucleus because they behave like waves	Do 17 shows an electron cloud model for a helium atom?
energy levels are located between the orbitals of atoms	Do this explains the blue- and purple- colored fireworks in Figure 5.16?
energy level 1 has the most energy	Do this explains the blue- and purple- colored fireworks in Figure 5.16?
electrons can move from one energy level to another	Do this explains the blue- and purple- colored fireworks in Figure 5.16?
scientists can now determine the exact location of any given electron	Do 17 shows an electron cloud model for a helium atom?
electrons are attracted to the nucleus because of the strong force	Do 17 shows an electron cloud model for a helium atom?
some regions of the electron cloud are denser than others	Do 17 shows an electron cloud model for a helium atom?
there is a maximum of two orbitals per energy level	Do you can learn more about orbitals and their electrons at the URL below:?
fireworks give off light when their electrons split in two	Do this explains the blue- and purple- colored fireworks in Figure 5.16?
since the 1920s physicists have known that electrons travel in fixed paths	Do these are the places between orbitals?
wavelike particles in the atom exist only where the wave is stable	Do these are the places between orbitals?
all energy levels have the same maximum number of electrons	Do this explains the blue- and purple- colored fireworks in Figure 5.16?
number of orbitals in the first energy level	Do you can learn more about orbitals and their electrons at the URL below:?
area surrounding the nucleus of an atom where electrons are likely to be	Do 17 shows an electron cloud model for a helium atom?
scientist who thought that electrons orbit the nucleus like planets orbit the sun	Do 14 shows Bohrs model of the atom?
maximum number of electrons per orbital	Do 17 shows an electron cloud model for a helium atom?
area located at a fixed distance from the nucleus of an atom where electrons can orbit the nucleus	Do 14 shows Bohrs model of the atom?
wavelike particles that move around the nucleus of an atom	Do 17 shows an electron cloud model for a helium atom?
scientist who discovered energy levels	Do this explains the blue- and purple- colored fireworks in Figure 5.16?
number of protons in an atom	Do how is this like Mendeleevs table?
row of the periodic table	Do you can see an interactive version at this URL:?
table based on the atomic number of elements	Do you can see an interactive version at this URL:?
mendeleev left spaces in his periodic table for unknown elements	Do you can see an interactive version at this URL:?
how an element is represented in the periodic table	Do you can see an interactive version at this URL:?
the modern periodic table is the same as mendeleevs table but with more elements	Do you can see an interactive version at this URL:?
table based on the atomic mass of elements	Do how is this like Mendeleevs table?
column of the periodic table	Do you can see an interactive version at this URL:?
the modern periodic table has more than 100 elements	Do you can see an interactive version at this URL:?
amount of matter in an atom	Do how is this like Mendeleevs table?
elements called actinides are in period 7 of the periodic table	Do you can see an interactive version at this URL:?
elements in the same period of the periodic table have similar properties	Do you can see an interactive version at this URL:?
mendeleev developed his periodic table in the 1860s	Do you can see an interactive version at this URL:?
mendeleev named the columns of his table periods	Do "?
elements within a group of the periodic table are identical to each other	Do you can see an interactive version at this URL:?
in mendeleevs table each period contains 18 elements	Do "?
mendeleevs used his table to predict unknown elements	Do "?
the elements mendeleev predicted were never discovered	Do how is this like Mendeleevs table?
lanthanide elements are placed in period 2 of the modern periodic table	Do you can see an interactive version at this URL:?
the chemical symbol for lead is pb	Do "?
most elements in the modern periodic table are metalloids	Do you can see an interactive version at this URL:?
krypton is a gaseous metal in group 18 of the periodic table	Do you can see an interactive version at this URL:?
class of elements that do not conduct electricity	Do org/3659/p?
word that describes most solid nonmetals	Do org/36?
smallest class of elements	Do org/3659/p?
all metalloids are solids are room temperature	Do you can dig deeper into the properties of metals at this URL:?
only nonmetal that is a liquid at room temperature	Do org/36?
nonmetals are the second largest class of elements	Do lithium has just one electron in this level, boron has three, fluorine has seven, and neon has eight?
word that describes most metals	Do lithium has just one electron in this level, boron has three, fluorine has seven, and neon has eight?
only metal that is a liquid at room temperature	Do you can dig deeper into the properties of metals at this URL:?
elements with eight valence electron are unreactive	Do lithium has just one electron in this level, boron has three, fluorine has seven, and neon has eight?
class of elements that conduct electricity	Do org/3659/p?
fluorine is an example of a metalloid	Do lithium has just one electron in this level, boron has three, fluorine has seven, and neon has eight?
nonmetals tend to give up electrons	Do only then are electrons added to the next higher energy level?
metals have relatively high melting points	Do you can dig deeper into the properties of metals at this URL:?
carbon is an example of a metalloid	Do lithium has just one electron in this level, boron has three, fluorine has seven, and neon has eight?
almost all nonmetals are solids are room temperature	Do org/36?
some nonmetals are semiconductors	Do org/3659/p?
silicon is the most common metalloid on earth	Do org/3659/p?
metals generally have fewer valence electrons than nonmetals	Do lithium has just one electron in this level, boron has three, fluorine has seven, and neon has eight?
the number of valence electrons determines an elements reactivity	Do only then are electrons added to the next higher energy level?
elements that want to gain electrons are usually metals	Do lithium has just one electron in this level, boron has three, fluorine has seven, and neon has eight?
the ability of an element to conduct electricity depends on its number of neutrons	Do only then are electrons added to the next higher energy level?
neon is more reactive than fluorine	Do lithium has just one electron in this level, boron has three, fluorine has seven, and neon has eight?
column of elements in the periodic table	Do many of the actinides do not occur in nature but are made in laboratories?
element in group 18 of the periodic table	Do for a short video about the noble gases and their properties, go to this URL:?
metal in group 1 of the periodic table	Do many of the actinides do not occur in nature but are made in laboratories?
radioactive transition metal	Do many of the actinides do not occur in nature but are made in laboratories?
metal in group 2 of the periodic table	Do many of the actinides do not occur in nature but are made in laboratories?
metal in group 3 of the periodic table	Do many of the actinides do not occur in nature but are made in laboratories?
nonmetal in group 17 of the periodic table	Do you can watch a video demonstrating the reactivity of halogens at this URL:?
the most reactive metals are the transition metals	Do all are solids at room temperature?
alkaline earth metals have three valence electrons	Do all are solids at room temperature?
mercury is the only metal that is a liquid at room temperature	Do you can watch a video demonstrating the reactivity of halogens at this URL:?
boron is an example of an element in the metalloids class	Do all the elements in the oxygen group have six valence electrons, and all are?
helium is an element in the group called the halogens	Do uRL:?
hydrogen is an alkali metal	Do you can watch a video demonstrating the reactivity of halogens at this URL:?
alkali metals are found only in compounds	Do all are solids at room temperature?
some alkali metals can float on water	Do uRL:?
calcium is an alkali metal	Do you can watch a video demonstrating the reactivity of halogens at this URL:?
there is just one group of transition metals	Do all are solids at room temperature?
many of the actinides do not occur in nature	Do many of the actinides do not occur in nature but are made in laboratories?
elements in the oxygen group have eight valence electrons	Do all are solids at room temperature?
selenium is an alkaline earth metal	Do all are solids at room temperature?
the halogen group includes only gases	Do you can watch a video demonstrating the reactivity of halogens at this URL:?
noble gases are found only in combination with other elements	Do for a short video about the noble gases and their properties, go to this URL:?
an oxygen atom has eight valence electrons	Do it always has the same composition?
a molecule of carbon monoxide has two carbon atoms and one oxygen atom	Do it always has the same composition?
the types of bonds in chemical compounds determine many of their properties	Do uRL:?
the same elements may form different compounds	Do it always has the same composition?
the chemical formula for carbon dioxide is co2 	Do how do their properties differ?
a hydrogen atom has two electrons	Do it always has the same composition?
each element is represented by a unique chemical formula	Do what is its chemical formula?
the compound carbon dioxide has twice as many oxygen atoms as carbon atoms	Do it always has the same composition?
the same elements may combine in different ratios to form the same compound	Do it always has the same composition?
any molecule that contains only hydrogen and oxygen is water	Do it always has the same composition?
different types of compounds differ in the types of bonds that hold their atoms together	Do uRL:?
both coal and diamond consist of atoms of carbon that are bonded together	Do it always has the same composition?
most of the unique substances on earth are compounds	Do it always has the same composition?
when atoms combine chemically they form mixtures	Do this gives it a more stable arrangement of electrons that takes less energy to maintain?
a chemical bond consists of matter that connects two different atoms	Do it always has the same composition?
pure substance that cannot be separated into any other substances	Do this gives it a more stable arrangement of electrons that takes less energy to maintain?
unique substance that forms when elements combine chemically	Do how do their properties differ?
particle of a compound that forms when atoms bond together	Do it always has the same composition?
one of three types of chemical compounds	Do it always has the same composition?
symbol representing a chemical compound	Do it always has the same composition?
particle in the outer energy level of an atom	Do this gives it a more stable arrangement of electrons that takes less energy to maintain?
force of attraction between atoms or ions that share or transfer electrons	Do this gives it a more stable arrangement of electrons that takes less energy to maintain?
ionic compounds form when ions share electrons	Do solutions of ionic compounds can be used to restore the ions?
in sodium chloride sodium loses an electron to chlorine	Do after sodium gives up its valence electron to fluorine, both atoms have a more stable arrangement of electrons?
ionic bonds form only between atoms of nonmetals	Do after sodium gives up its valence electron to fluorine, both atoms have a more stable arrangement of electrons?
the amount of energy needed to form an ion depends only on the number of valence electrons	Do as a result, they are very reactive?
francium has the same number of valence electrons as lithium	Do as a result, they are very reactive?
alkali metals release the most energy when they become ions	Do as a result, they are very reactive?
salt consists of molecules of sodium and chloride ions	Do the name of the positive?
when an atom of iodine becomes an ion it is named iodide	Do as a result, they are very reactive?
ionic compounds are usually liquids at room temperature	Do solutions of ionic compounds can be used to restore the ions?
water is an example of an ionic compound	Do solutions of ionic compounds can be used to restore the ions?
an ionic bond forms when atoms of a nonmetal give up electrons to atoms of a metal	Do after sodium gives up its valence electron to fluorine, both atoms have a more stable arrangement of electrons?
sodium and chloride ions have equal but opposite charges	Do htm?
metals need energy in order to become ions	Do after sodium gives up its valence electron to fluorine, both atoms have a more stable arrangement of electrons?
the bonds of crystals are very weak	Do after sodium gives up its valence electron to fluorine, both atoms have a more stable arrangement of electrons?
solid ionic compounds are good conductors of electricity	Do solutions of ionic compounds can be used to restore the ions?
dissolved ionic compound	Do solutions of ionic compounds can be used to restore the ions?
unique substance that forms when a metal and a nonmetal combine chemically	Do after sodium gives up its valence electron to fluorine, both atoms have a more stable arrangement of electrons?
example of an alkali metal	Do after sodium gives up its valence electron to fluorine, both atoms have a more stable arrangement of electrons?
force of attraction that holds together positive and negative ions	Do as a result, they are very reactive?
example of a negative ion	Do as a result, they are very reactive?
charged particle that forms when an atom gains or loses electrons	Do after sodium gives up its valence electron to fluorine, both atoms have a more stable arrangement of electrons?
structure that forms when many positive and negative ions bond together	Do the name of the positive?
any compound consisting of two or more nonmetals	Do several other elements also normally occur as diatomic molecules: nitrogen, oxygen, and all but one of the halogens (fluorine, chlorine, bromine, and iodine)?
covalent bond in which neither atom has an electric charge	Do 10 shows an example of nonpolar bonds?
covalent bond between two atoms of the same element	Do several other elements also normally occur as diatomic molecules: nitrogen, oxygen, and all but one of the halogens (fluorine, chlorine, bromine, and iodine)?
force of attraction holding together two atoms that share a pair of electrons	Do this forms the covalent compound water?
weak bond that forms between oppositely charged ends of two molecules	Do uRL:?
covalent bond in which the two atoms are oppositely charged	Do 10 shows an example of nonpolar bonds?
compound in which molecules have oppositely charged ends	Do uRL:?
covalent bonds form only between atoms of different elements	Do this forms the covalent compound water?
a single covalent bond involves just one valence electron	Do this forms the covalent compound water?
sharing electrons allows atoms to have a full outer energy level	Do this forms the covalent compound water?
each hydrogen atom can form two covalent bonds	Do this forms the covalent compound water?
the hydrogen end of a water molecule is slightly negative in charge	Do 10 shows an example of nonpolar bonds?
covalent bonds are found only in covalent compounds	Do many covalent compounds also do not dissolve in water as all ionic compounds do?
some covalent compounds contain atoms of just one element	Do several other elements also normally occur as diatomic molecules: nitrogen, oxygen, and all but one of the halogens (fluorine, chlorine, bromine, and iodine)?
formaldehyde is an example of a covalent compound	Do this forms the covalent compound water?
oxygen gas consists of individual oxygen atoms	Do you Try It! Problem: What is the name of the compound that contains three oxygen atoms and two nitrogen atoms? What is its chemical formula?
an oxygen atom forms two covalent bonds	Do this forms the covalent compound water?
oxygen always becomes negatively charged when it forms covalent bonds	Do 10 shows an example of nonpolar bonds?
in naming a covalent compound the element closest to the right of the periodic table is named first	Do you Try It! Problem: What is the name of the compound that contains three oxygen atoms and two nitrogen atoms? What is its chemical formula?
the second element named in a covalent compound gets the suffix ide	Do you Try It! Problem: What is the name of the compound that contains three oxygen atoms and two nitrogen atoms? What is its chemical formula?
polar compounds tend to have higher boiling points than nonpolar compounds	Do uRL:?
if a bond forms between calcium and chlorine the bond is covalent	Do several other elements also normally occur as diatomic molecules: nitrogen, oxygen, and all but one of the halogens (fluorine, chlorine, bromine, and iodine)?
type of ion a metal forms	Do uRL:?
structure formed by metallic bonding	Do uRL:?
example of an alloy	Do if you have braces on your teeth, you may even have this alloy in your mouth!?
any element that is a good conductor of electricity	Do uRL:?
a metallic bond may form between a metal and any other element	Do uRL:?
example of a metal	Do uRL:?
metals can be shaped into thin sheets	Do uRL:?
mixture of a metal with one or more other elements	Do if you have braces on your teeth, you may even have this alloy in your mouth!?
metal ions are surrounded by a sea of positive charge	Do uRL:?
force of attraction between a metal ion and valence electrons it shares with other ions of the metal	Do uRL:?
special bonds form in metals that do not form in other classes of elements	Do uRL:?
bronze has been used for thousands of years	Do uRL:?
brass is an alloy of iron and copper	Do if you have braces on your teeth, you may even have this alloy in your mouth!?
a metallic lattice is more rigid than an ionic crystal	Do uRL:?
metallic bonds explain some of the unique properties of metals	Do uRL:?
metal ions form bonds with the valence electrons around them	Do uRL:?
examples of metals include iron zinc and carbon	Do if you have braces on your teeth, you may even have this alloy in your mouth!?
a metallic lattice is held together by ionic bonds	Do uRL:?
iron is stronger than steel	Do if you have braces on your teeth, you may even have this alloy in your mouth!?
most metal objects are made of alloys	Do if you have braces on your teeth, you may even have this alloy in your mouth!?
bronze is a compound of copper and tin	Do uRL:?
gold jewelry is usually made of pure gold	Do if you have braces on your teeth, you may even have this alloy in your mouth!?
most chemical reactions take place in labs	Do you can see another example at this URL: http://w?
all changes in matter involve chemical reactions	Do uRL:?
evaporation is an example of a chemical change	Do you can see another example at this URL: http://w?
reactants and products can be elements or compounds	Do but it might take years for metal to rust?
chemical reactions may occur quickly or slowly	Do but it might take years for metal to rust?
some chemical reactions can proceed in just one direction	Do you can see an animation of a chemical reaction reaching equilibrium at this URL:?
an example of a chemical change is water boiling	Do you can see another example at this URL: http://w?
freezing involves a chemical reaction	Do you can see another example at this URL: http://w?
a banana turning brown is a chemical change	Do you can see another example at this URL: http://w?
wax melting is an example of a chemical reaction	Do you can see another example at this URL: http://w?
the products and reactants of a chemical reaction have different atoms	Do you can see another example at this URL: http://w?
all chemical reactions are reversible	Do you can see another example at this URL: http://w?
rusting is an example of a chemical change	Do you can see another example at this URL: http://w?
condensation is a type of chemical reaction	Do you can see another example at this URL: http://w?
a change in temperature is a common sign of a chemical reaction	Do uRL:?
substance produced in a chemical reaction	Do but it might take years for metal to rust?
force of attraction that breaks and reforms in a chemical reaction	Do you can see another example at this URL: http://w?
substance that starts a chemical reaction	Do you can see another example at this URL: http://w?
example of chemical change	Do you can see another example at this URL: http://w?
balance between opposing changes	Do you can see an animation of a chemical reaction reaching equilibrium at this URL:?
process in which some substances become different substances	Do but it might take years for metal to rust?
example of a physical change	Do but it might take years for metal to rust?
the symbol 2o2 represents two molecules of oxygen	Do is equation 2 balanced? Count the oxygen atoms to find out?
a coefficient of 1 usually is not written	Do is equation 2 balanced? Count the oxygen atoms to find out?
subscripts are used to balance chemical equations	Do therefore, equation 1 is not balanced?
the general form of a chemical equation is reactants  products	Do therefore, equation 1 is not balanced?
the first step in balancing a chemical equation is counting atoms	Do therefore, equation 1 is not balanced?
a chemical equation must balance only when the reaction reversible	Do therefore, equation 1 is not balanced?
the symbol co2 represents two molecules of carbon monoxide	Do is equation 2 balanced? Count the oxygen atoms to find out?
the symbol 2h2 represents two atoms of hydrogen	Do is equation 2 balanced? Count the oxygen atoms to find out?
coefficients are used to balance chemical equations	Do is equation 2 balanced? Count the oxygen atoms to find out?
in balancing chemical equations you should use the smallest subscripts possible	Do therefore, equation 1 is not balanced?
the number of each type of molecule must be the same on both sides of a chemical equation	Do therefore, equation 1 is not balanced?
changing coefficients changes the substances involved in a chemical reaction	Do is equation 2 balanced? Count the oxygen atoms to find out?
chemists use a standard method to represent chemical reactions	Do if more than one product were produced, plus signs would be used between them as well?
the chemical equation h2 co3  h2 o  co2 is balanced	Do therefore, equation 1 is not balanced?
water is the reactant in the chemical equation h2 o  h2  o2 	Do therefore, equation 1 is not balanced?
symbolic representation of a chemical reaction	Do if more than one product were produced, plus signs would be used between them as well?
example of a coefficient	Do is equation 2 balanced? Count the oxygen atoms to find out?
symbol of a chemical compound	Do is equation 2 balanced? Count the oxygen atoms to find out?
example of a subscript	Do if more than one product were produced, plus signs would be used between them as well?
number showing how many atoms or molecules of a given element or compound are involved in a chemical	Do is equation 2 balanced? Count the oxygen atoms to find out?
symbol of an chemical element	Do is equation 2 balanced? Count the oxygen atoms to find out?
number showing how many atoms of a given element are in a molecule	Do if more than one product were produced, plus signs would be used between them as well?
one reactant breaking down into two or more products	Do you can see other examples at this URL: http://w?
ions changing places in two compounds	Do both types are described below?
two reactants combining to form a single product	Do you can see more examples at this URL:?
substance reacting quickly with oxygen	Do the general equation for a combustion reaction can be represented by: Fuel + O2 ! CO2 + H2 O?
one of the reactants in a combustion reaction	Do you can see more examples at this URL:?
one ion taking the place of another in a compound	Do ogv?
another term for a combustion reaction	Do the general equation for a combustion reaction can be represented by: Fuel + O2 ! CO2 + H2 O?
a synthesis reaction occurs when two or more reactants combine to form a single product	Do you can see more examples at this URL:?
another term for a combustion reaction is decomposition	Do you can see other examples at this URL: http://w?
fossil fuels such as oil and natural gas consist of hydrocarbons	Do the combustion of methane is represented by the equation: CH4 + 2O2 ! CO2 + 2H2 O?
the fuel that cells use for energy is oxygen	Do which type of chemical reaction is photosynthesis?
plants combine carbon dioxide and water to form glucose	Do which type of chemical reaction is photosynthesis?
water decomposes when an electric current passes through it	Do )?
a combustion reaction usually gives off heat and light	Do the general equation for a combustion reaction can be represented by: Fuel + O2 ! CO2 + H2 O?
the burning of glucose in cells is called cellular combustion	Do which type of chemical reaction is photosynthesis?
sodium chloride forms in a decomposition reaction	Do you can see other examples at this URL: http://w?
methane and oxygen combine in a synthesis reaction	Do you can see other examples at this URL: http://w?
one product of the reaction in question 5 is carbon dioxide	Do the general equation for a combustion reaction can be represented by: Fuel + O2 ! CO2 + H2 O?
there are two types of decomposition reactions	Do both types are described below?
carbon dioxide forms only in combustion reactions	Do which type of chemical reaction is photosynthesis?
the general equation ab  cd  ad  cb represents a replacement reaction	Do can you name the products of this reaction?
the chemical reaction 2k  2h2 o  2koh  h2 is a replacement reaction	Do ogv?
energy stored in chemical bonds	Do 14 show the chemical energy of reactants and products in each type of reaction?
substance that speeds up chemical reactions	Do a reaction that takes a split second to occur with an enzyme might take billions of years without it!?
turning out heat	Do both food frying and food spoiling are chemical reactions that happen faster at higher temperatures?
an endothermic chemical reaction is a reaction that releases energy	Do 14 show the chemical energy of reactants and products in each type of reaction?
how fast a reaction occurs	Do factors that affect the reaction rate include: temperature of reactants concentration of reactants surface area of reactants presence of catalysts?
the general equation for an exothermic reaction is reactants  energy  products	Do if you were standing near the fire, you would also feel its heat?
energy needed to start a reaction	Do factors that affect the reaction rate include: temperature of reactants concentration of reactants surface area of reactants presence of catalysts?
taking in heat	Do both food frying and food spoiling are chemical reactions that happen faster at higher temperatures?
plants synthesize glucose in an endothermic chemical reaction	Do the chemical equation for photosynthesis is: 6CO2 + 6H2 O ! C6 H12 O6 + 6O2?
number of particles of a substance in a given volume	Do the greater concentration of oxygen in the air makes combustion rapid if a fire starts burning?
the law of conservation of energy does not apply to chemical reactions	Do 14 show the chemical energy of reactants and products in each type of reaction?
any factor that helps reactants come together lowers the activation energy	Do factors that affect the reaction rate include: temperature of reactants concentration of reactants surface area of reactants presence of catalysts?
all chemical reactions involve energy	Do both food frying and food spoiling are chemical reactions that happen faster at higher temperatures?
one of the most important endothermic reactions is photosynthesis	Do the chemical equation for photosynthesis is: 6CO2 + 6H2 O ! C6 H12 O6 + 6O2?
in an exothermic reaction it takes more energy to break bonds in reactants than is released when bonds	Do if you were standing near the fire, you would also feel its heat?
combustion is an example of an endothermic reaction	Do the greater concentration of oxygen in the air makes combustion rapid if a fire starts burning?
there is no overall change in the amount of energy in chemical reactions	Do 14 show the chemical energy of reactants and products in each type of reaction?
only endothermic reactions need energy to get started	Do 14 show the chemical energy of reactants and products in each type of reaction?
energy is absorbed in exothermic reactions	Do 14 show the chemical energy of reactants and products in each type of reaction?
an increase in temperature is a sign of an exothermic reaction	Do if you were standing near the fire, you would also feel its heat?
products have less stored chemical energy than reactants in an endothermic reaction	Do 14 show the chemical energy of reactants and products in each type of reaction?
catalysts in living things are called enzymes	Do a reaction that takes a split second to occur with an enzyme might take billions of years without it!?
large molecule that consists of many smaller molecules joined together by covalent bonds	Do to learn more about polymers and how they form, go to this URL:  (2:13)?
form of carbon in which carbon atoms are arranged in layers	Do examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3?
one of the simplest carbon compounds	Do examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3?
form of carbon that it is the hardest natural substance	Do examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3?
carbon is a nonmetal in group 12 of the periodic table	Do the valence electrons of carbon are shown in Figure 9.1?
small molecule joined with other small molecules by covalent bonds to form a much larger molecule	Do to learn more about polymers and how they form, go to this URL:  (2:13)?
a structural formula uses dots to represent electrons	Do this type of diagram is called a structural formula?
form of carbon in which carbon atoms are arranged in hollow spheres	Do examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3?
all carbon polymers are made in labs or factories	Do to learn more about polymers and how they form, go to this URL:  (2:13)?
carbon compound found only in plants	Do examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3?
graphite is used as a lubricant because it is slippery	Do to learn how this form of carbon got its funny names, go to this URL:  This metal cutter has a diamond blade?
each molecule of methane contains four atoms of carbon	Do examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3?
the chief component of cellulose is carbon	Do examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3?
carbon forms more compounds than any other element	Do examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3?
carbon can form bonds with any other element except itself	Do examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3?
the carbon compound with the formula ch4 is polyethylene	Do this type of diagram is called a structural formula?
in a triple bond two atoms share three valence electrons	Do examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3?
plastics are examples of synthetic carbon polymers	Do examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3?
all forms of crystalline carbon have the same structure	Do examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3?
carbon can combine only with hydrogen and oxygen	Do examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3?
carbon forms ionic bonds with other nonmetals	Do examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3?
there are millions of known carbon compounds	Do examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3?
all hydrocarbons are small chemical compounds	Do in cyclic molecules, the chain of carbon atoms is joined at the two ends to form a ring?
hydrocarbons are generally nonpolar compounds	Do uRL:?
isomers of a given compound always have the same properties	Do they are liquids or waxy solids at room temperature?
hydrocarbons are compounds that contain only carbon and hydrogen	Do unsaturated hydrocarbons are classified on the basis of their bonds as alkenes, alkynes, or aromatic hydrocarbons?
heptane is an unsaturated hydrocarbon	Do unsaturated hydrocarbons are classified on the basis of their bonds as alkenes, alkynes, or aromatic hydrocarbons?
the simplest hydrocarbons are the aromatic hydrocarbons	Do unsaturated hydrocarbons are classified on the basis of their bonds as alkenes, alkynes, or aromatic hydrocarbons?
butane has branchedchain molecules	Do compared with the straight- and branched-chain alkanes, cycloalkanes have higher boiling and melting points?
the size of hydrocarbon molecules influences their properties	Do uRL:?
butane and isobutane differ in their number of hydrogen atoms	Do you can rotate the molecule models to get a better idea of their shapes?
any hydrocarbon ending in ane has only straightchain molecules	Do in cyclic molecules, the chain of carbon atoms is joined at the two ends to form a ring?
alkenes may form straight or branchedchains but not rings	Do compared with the straight- and branched-chain alkanes, cycloalkanes have higher boiling and melting points?
hydrocarbons are used to make synthetic fabrics such as polyester	Do you can read more about these sources of hydrocarbons in the chapter Introduction to Energy and at the URL below?
the physical properties of alkenes are generally similar to those of alkanes	Do they are liquids or waxy solids at room temperature?
alkynes are relatively rare in nature	Do in fact, alkynes of all shapes are relatively rare, at least in nature?
fossil fuels formed over millions of years from dead organisms	Do you can read more about these sources of hydrocarbons in the chapter Introduction to Energy and at the URL below?
ringshaped unsaturated hydrocarbons	Do unsaturated hydrocarbons are classified on the basis of their bonds as alkenes, alkynes, or aromatic hydrocarbons?
all compounds that consist only of carbon and hydrogen	Do unsaturated hydrocarbons are classified on the basis of their bonds as alkenes, alkynes, or aromatic hydrocarbons?
unsaturated hydrocarbons with at least one double bond	Do unsaturated hydrocarbons are classified on the basis of their bonds as alkenes, alkynes, or aromatic hydrocarbons?
ringshaped saturated hydrocarbons	Do unsaturated hydrocarbons are classified on the basis of their bonds as alkenes, alkynes, or aromatic hydrocarbons?
saturated hydrocarbons such as ethane	Do unsaturated hydrocarbons are classified on the basis of their bonds as alkenes, alkynes, or aromatic hydrocarbons?
molecules with the same atoms but different shapes	Do you can rotate the molecule models to get a better idea of their shapes?
unsaturated hydrocarbons with at least one triple bond	Do unsaturated hydrocarbons are classified on the basis of their bonds as alkenes, alkynes, or aromatic hydrocarbons?
all biochemical compounds contain hydrogen	Do in addition to carbon and hydrogen, lipids contain oxygen?
there are a total of 20 different biochemical compounds	Do in addition to carbon and hydrogen, lipids contain oxygen?
some nucleic acids are hormones that regulate life processes	Do they are DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and RNA (ribonucleic acid)?
biochemical compounds are carbonbased compounds found in living things	Do in addition to carbon and hydrogen, lipids contain oxygen?
the simplest sugar is named sucrose	Do it consists of one molecule of glucose and one molecule of fructose?
the main function of simple carbohydrates is to store energy in animals	Do our digestive system breaks down starch to simple sugars, which our cells use for energy?
bread is a good source of starch in the diet	Do our digestive system breaks down starch to simple sugars, which our cells use for energy?
we need oils to help move food wastes through the digestive tract	Do in addition to carbon and hydrogen, lipids contain oxygen?
the only biochemical compounds that contains sulfur are nucleic acids	Do protein molecules consist of one or more chains of small molecules called amino acids?
hemoglobin is a protein that fights infections in the blood	Do 20)?
the most abundant biochemical compound is cellulose	Do organisms use carbohydrates mainly for energy?
hemoglobin transports oxygen through the blood	Do in addition to carbon and hydrogen, lipids contain oxygen?
muscle tissues are composed mainly of fatty acids	Do 20)?
organisms use lipids mainly to store energy	Do in addition to carbon and hydrogen, lipids contain oxygen?
there are two main types of nucleic acids	Do they are DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and RNA (ribonucleic acid)?
long carbon chains found in lipids	Do in addition to carbon and hydrogen, lipids contain oxygen?
class of biochemical compounds that includes oils	Do in addition to carbon and hydrogen, lipids contain oxygen?
general name given to biochemical polymers	Do in addition to carbon and hydrogen, lipids contain oxygen?
class of biochemical compounds that includes dna	Do in addition to carbon and hydrogen, lipids contain oxygen?
building blocks of proteins	Do uRL:?
class of biochemical compounds that includes cellulose	Do organisms use carbohydrates mainly for energy?
class of biochemical compounds that includes enzymes	Do in addition to carbon and hydrogen, lipids contain oxygen?
all organisms make food by photosynthesis	Do how do living things get energy from glucose? The answer is cellular respiration?
the synthesis of glucose requires carbon dioxide	Do uRL:?
insectcatching plants such as pitcher plants obtain glucose from insects	Do how do living things get energy from glucose? The answer is cellular respiration?
chemical reactions provide living cells with energy	Do uRL:?
photosynthesis is an exothermic or energyreleasing process	Do how do living things get energy from glucose? The answer is cellular respiration?
the overall chemical reaction for photosynthesis is represented by the equation c6 h12 o6  6o2  6co2	Do how do living things get energy from glucose? The answer is cellular respiration?
products of cellular respiration include many small energystoring molecules	Do uRL:?
cellular respiration takes place only in organisms that cannot make their own food	Do how do living things get energy from glucose? The answer is cellular respiration?
the process of cellular respiration requires carbon dioxide	Do uRL:?
one of the products of cellular respiration is oxygen	Do uRL:?
all living things need energy just to stay alive	Do two are described in Figure 9.27?
cellular respiration is an endothermic or energyabsorbing process	Do uRL:?
only plants can carry out photosynthesis	Do how do living things get energy from glucose? The answer is cellular respiration?
cellular respiration occurs in all living cells	Do uRL:?
one of the products of cellular respiration is oxygen	Do uRL:?
process in which cells break down glucose and release energy	Do uRL:?
any chemical reaction that takes place in living things	Do uRL:?
protein that speeds up biochemical reactions	Do two are described in Figure 9.27?
byproduct of photosynthesis	Do how do living things get energy from glucose? The answer is cellular respiration?
compound that cells use for energy	Do uRL:?
pigment that captures light energy	Do uRL:?
process in which certain organisms make glucose	Do how do living things get energy from glucose? The answer is cellular respiration?
acceleration is a vector	Do use your imagination to think of others?
a change in direction without a change in speed is called velocity	Do the next time you ride in a car, notice how it feels as the car accelerates in each of these ways?
acceleration can never be negative	Do use your imagination to think of others?
a heavier object always falls to the ground more quickly than a lighter object	Do 8 m/s)?
objects fall toward earth at a constant rate of speed	Do 8 m/s)?
objects with different masses have the same gravitational force acting on them	Do 8 m/s)?
if a measurement is precise it must also be accurate	Do q: If you were to hit four golf balls toward a hole and your shots were both accurate and precise, where would the balls land? A: All four golf balls would land in the hole (accurate) and also very close to one another (precise)?
only accurate measurements are precise	Do q: If you were to hit four golf balls toward a hole and your shots were both accurate and precise, where would the balls land? A: All four golf balls would land in the hole (accurate) and also very close to one another (precise)?
pure water is an example of a neutral substance	Do this can be represented by the chemical equation: H O 2 NaOH OH + Na+ Q: If you were to combine acid and base solutions, what products do you think would be produced? A: Combining acid and base solutions produces water and a neutral ionic compound?
only endothermic reactions require activation energy	Do only after it starts does the exothermic reaction produce more energy than it uses?
a chemical reaction will not occur unless reactants are moving	Do still more energy is needed to start breaking bonds in reactants?
all chemical reactions need a constant input of energy to continue	Do only after it starts does the exothermic reaction produce more energy than it uses?
exothermic reactions always need less activation energy than endothermic reactions	Do only after it starts does the exothermic reaction produce more energy than it uses?
all alkaline earth metals have three valence electrons	Do they are relatively soft and low in density, although not as soft and lightweight as alkali metals?
alkaline earth metals are the most reactive metals	Do they are relatively soft and low in density, although not as soft and lightweight as alkali metals?
alkaline earth metals never exist as pure substances in nature	Do this makes alkaline Earth metals with their two valence electrons less reactive than alkali metals with their one valence electron?
alloys consist only of metallic elements	Do uRL:?
most metal objects are made of alloys rather than pure metals	Do uRL:?
brass is an alloy that is used for doorknobs and plumbing fixtures	Do sterling silver is harder and stronger than pure silver, while retaining the malleability and luster of pure silver?
an alpha particle consists of one proton and one neutron	Do losing the protons and neutrons makes the nucleus more stable?
alpha decay is the least dangerous type of radioactive decay	Do energy is emitted in all three types of decay, but only alpha and beta decay also emit particles?
archimedes was a greek mathematician who lived more than 2000 years ago	Do 07 m3?
a bigger object displaces less water than a smaller object	Do 07 m3?
archimedes law explains why some very heavy objects can float on water	Do this is known as Archimedes law (or Archimedes principle)?
in a fluorescent light bulb mercury gas gives off visible light	Do phosphor absorbs the ultraviolet light and then gives off most of the energy as visible light?
a vapor light produces light by fluorescence	Do phosphor absorbs the ultraviolet light and then gives off most of the energy as visible light?
the strong nuclear force is a force of attraction between quarks	Do q: Why do you think protons cluster together in the nucleus of the atom instead of repelling each other because of their like charges? A: The electromagnetic force of repulsion between positively charged protons is overcome by a stronger force, called the strong nuclear force?
the weak nuclear force is transferred by w and z bosons	Do instead it would be a hydrogen atom, because all hydrogen atoms have a single proton?
up quarks can change to down quarks	Do uRL:?
outside of the nucleus an atom is mostly empty space	Do 1 shows these parts of the atom?
the nucleus makes up about 1100th of the total radius of an atom	Do uRL:?
the nucleus has almost all of the mass of an atom	Do uRL:?
there is an electric force of repulsion between neutrons and protons	Do 1 shows these parts of the atom?
all atoms of a given element have the same number of protons	Do this, in turn, determines many of the atoms properties?
atoms of different elements always have different numbers of protons	Do this, in turn, determines many of the atoms properties?
numbers called subscripts are used to balance chemical equations	Do therefore, equation 2 is balanced?
betapositive decay begins with a proton	Do in each case, the atom becomes a different element because it has a different number of protons?
beta particles can travel only a few centimeters through the air	Do they are even more harmful if they are ingested or inhaled?
betapositive decay results in a nucleus with one less proton	Do in each case, the atom becomes a different element because it has a different number of protons?
there are only about 100 different biochemical compounds	Do uRL:?
the similarity in biochemical compounds between living things provides some of the best evidence for evolution	Do 1), the cytochrome c molecule is nearly 50 percent the same?
almost all biochemical compounds are polymers	Do uRL:?
the reactants of photosynthesis are oxygen and water	Do they combine to produce carbon dioxide, water, and energy?
photosynthesis is an anabolic reaction	Do enzymes are also very efficient, so waste products rarely form?
cellular respiration is a catabolic reaction	Do they combine to produce carbon dioxide, water, and energy?
electrons with the most energy are located closest to the nucleus of the atom	Do just as you can stand only on the rungs and not in between them, electrons can orbit the nucleus only at fixed distances from the nucleus and not in between them?
energy levels around the atomic nucleus correspond to quantum increases in energy	Do knowing this may have made it easier for scientists to accept the idea that energy exists in discrete units as well?
all molecules with polar bonds are polar molecules	Do q: Why is carbon dioxide nonpolar? A: The symmetrical arrangement of atoms in carbon dioxide results in opposites sides of the molecule having the same charge?
the oxygen end of a water molecule is positively charged	Do the two oxygen nuclei have an equal force of attraction for their four shared electrons?
a fluid exerts pressure only in an upward direction	Do if buoyant force applies to all objects in fluids, why do some objects sink instead of float? A: The answer has to do with their weight?
fluid pressure is greater at greater depth	Do if buoyant force applies to all objects in fluids, why do some objects sink instead of float? A: The answer has to do with their weight?
the fluid below an object exerts greater force on it than the fluid above the object	Do if buoyant force applies to all objects in fluids, why do some objects sink instead of float? A: The answer has to do with their weight?
any change in an objects motion is called velocity	Do this can be represented by the equation: Acceleration = Net force Mass or a = F m?
the greater the net force acting on an object the greater its acceleration will be	Do this can be represented by the equation: Acceleration = Net force Mass or a = F m?
it is easier to calculate acceleration for any given moment of time than to calculate average acceleration for a period of time	Do then acceleration is the change in velocity (represented by v) divided by the change in time (represented by t): acceleration = v t?
plants stores extra glucose as starches	Do our digestive system breaks down starches to sugar, which our cells use for energy?
cellulose is a polymer of starch	Do we cant digest cellulose, but it helps keep food wastes moving through the digestive tract?
about half of all known compounds contain carbon	Do there are millions of known carbon compounds, and carbon is the only element that can form so many different compounds?
methane is an example of a hydrocarbon	Do methane (CH4 )?
carbon can form more compounds than any other element	Do there are millions of known carbon compounds, and carbon is the only element that can form so many different compounds?
rubber consists of the monomer named ethylene	Do uRL:?
any given polymer consists of just one type of monomer	Do like beads on a string, monomers in a polymer may be all the same or different from one another?
a catalyst is a reactant in the reaction it catalyzes	Do q: How is a catalyst like a tunnel through a mountain? A: Like a tunnel through a mountain, a catalyst provides a faster pathway for a chemical reaction to occur?
a catalyst is used up in the reaction it catalyzes	Do q: How is a catalyst like a tunnel through a mountain? A: Like a tunnel through a mountain, a catalyst provides a faster pathway for a chemical reaction to occur?
more than 1000 different enzymes are necessary for human life	Do try this yourself and see if you can taste the reaction?
the presence or absence of a catalyst is the only factor that affects the rate of a chemical reaction	Do q: How is a catalyst like a tunnel through a mountain? A: Like a tunnel through a mountain, a catalyst provides a faster pathway for a chemical reaction to occur?
organisms that make glucose are called autotrophs	Do carbon dioxide and water vapor produced by cellular respiration are released from the body with each exhalation?
cellular respiration takes place only in the cells of heterotrophs	Do uRL:?
the chemical reactions of cellular respiration are anabolic reactions	Do uRL:?
valence electrons are the basis of all chemical bonds	Do q: Why do you think that chemical bonds form? A: Chemical bonds form because they give atoms a more stable arrangement of electrons?
an example of a compound that contains ionic bonds is water	Do 2, form metallic bonds?
metallic bonds form a latticelike structure	Do 2, form metallic bonds?
the substances that form in a chemical reaction are completely different from the substances that start the reaction	Do are the numbers the same on both sides of the arrow? The answer is yes, so the equation is balanced?
a given chemical compound always has exactly the same ratio of elements	Do when there is just one atom of an element in a molecule, no subscript is used in the chemical formula?
in the formula for an ionic compound the negative ion is always written first	Do when there is just one atom of an element in a molecule, no subscript is used in the chemical formula?
a chemical reaction changes some substances into other substances with different chemical properties	Do some chemical bonds break and new chemical bonds form?
the substances involved in a chemical reaction may be elements or compounds	Do some chemical bonds break and new chemical bonds form?
warmer reactants react more quickly than cooler reactants	Do however, the nails have a greater surface area, so they will rust faster?
food spoils faster at higher temperatures because heat is a catalyst	Do right image: Bread after 1 month in a cold refrigerator?
warmer reactants have more energy and move faster	Do right image: Bread after 1 month in a cold refrigerator?
all compounds consist of a fixed ratio of elements	Do how can this happen if a compound always consists of the same elements in the same ratio? A: If the same elements combine in different ratios, they form different compounds?
water is an example of a covalent compound	Do sodium chloride (table salt) is an example of an ionic compound?
carbon dioxide is an example of an ionic compound	Do sodium chloride (table salt) is an example of an ionic compound?
a rainbow includes all the colors of visible light	Do only seven main colors of light are actually represented in the diagram?
visible light includes all the wavelengths of light that the human eye can detect	Do only seven main colors of light are actually represented in the diagram?
the net force acting on you when you sit still in a chair is zero	Do it also explains why the straw in a glass of water appears to be broken?
when two forces act on the same object in opposite directions the net force is always greater than the individual forces	Do it also explains why the straw in a glass of water appears to be broken?
when two forces act on the same object in the same direction the net force is always less than the individual forces	Do uRL:?
the main component of natural gas is nitrogen	Do the flame will also not be as hot as a completely blue flame for the same reason?
products of incomplete combustion include only carbon dioxide and water	Do the general equation for a complete combustion reaction is: Fuel + O2  CO2 + H2 O The burning of charcoal is a combustion reaction?
some compound machines consist of thousands of simple machines	Do big compound machines such as cars may consist of hundreds or even thousands of simple machines?
all machines must overcome friction	Do this is how friction is reduced in a car engine?
no machine is 100 percent efficient	Do this is how friction is reduced in a car engine?
a compound always has the same elements in the same proportions	Do but you would be wrong?
the properties of compounds are the same as the properties of the elements that form them	Do in fact, it is a necessary component of the human diet?
a molecule consists of two or more atoms bonded together	Do you saw models of carbon dioxide and water molecules above?
energy cannot be created or destroyed in chemical reactions	Do these reactions, called endothermic reactions, absorb energy?
energy cannot change form during chemical reactions	Do these reactions, called endothermic reactions, absorb energy?
in an endothermic reaction products have less chemical energy than reactants	Do these reactions, called endothermic reactions, absorb energy?
the letter c in the equation in question 1 represents a constant	Do mass changes to energy, but the total amount of mass and energy combined remains the same?
the speed of light is 300000 km per hour	Do multiplying this mass by c2 would yield enough energy to power 3,600 homes for a year!?
einsteins equation has recently been disproven by realworld evidence	Do multiplying this mass by c2 would yield enough energy to power 3,600 homes for a year!?
the amount of energy in a tiny amount of mass is very large	Do mass changes to energy, but the total amount of mass and energy combined remains the same?
einsteins equation shows that mass and energy are not conserved in nuclear reactions	Do mass changes to energy, but the total amount of mass and energy combined remains the same?
chemical reactions are represented by chemical formulas	Do balanced chemical equations show that mass is conserved in chemical reactions?
the equation h2  o2  h2o is balanced	Do there are also four hydrogen atoms and four oxygen atoms on both sides of the arrow?
heat is the transfer of thermal energy	Do uRL:?
when particles are more spread out they have higher density	Do uRL:?
higher density particles sink downward through a fluid	Do uRL:?
most cooling systems get energy from electricity	Do 1 how a refrigerator does its work?
the refrigerant changes between solid and liquid states as it passes through the refrigerator	Do work is done by a refrigerator to move the refrigerant through the different components of the refrigerator?
as a liquid the refrigerant transfers thermal energy to the outside air	Do work is done by a refrigerator to move the refrigerant through the different components of the refrigerator?
electrons in covalent bonds are attracted to the nucleus of just one atom	Do covalent bonds form only between atoms of nonmetals?
a covalent bond always includes a pair of electrons	Do covalent bonds form only between atoms of nonmetals?
the formation of one or more covalent bonds always results in a covalent compound	Do covalent bonds form only between atoms of nonmetals?
the form of carbon in question 6 has been found in meteorites	Do fullerene Crystal?
fullerenes are used to make soccer balls	Do fullerene Crystal?
scientists now reject most of daltons atomic theory	Do atoms consist of several types of smaller particles, including protons, neutrons, and electrons?
dalton based his ideas about atoms on his own scientific research	Do atoms consist of several types of smaller particles, including protons, neutrons, and electrons?
dalton thought that atoms consist of smaller particles of matter	Do atoms consist of several types of smaller particles, including protons, neutrons, and electrons?
daltons atomic theory was quickly accepted by most other scientists	Do atoms consist of several types of smaller particles, including protons, neutrons, and electrons?
dalton thought that a given compound always consists of the same kinds of atoms in the same proportions	Do atoms consist of several types of smaller particles, including protons, neutrons, and electrons?
there is a low level of natural radiation in the environment	Do background radiation is generally considered to be safe for living things?
background radiation is generally considered harmful to living things	Do background radiation is generally considered to be safe for living things?
only living things can be harmed by radiation	Do background radiation is generally considered to be safe for living things?
products of decomposition reactions are always individual elements	Do q: What is the chemical equation for the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide (H2 O2 ) to water (H2 O) and oxygen (O2 )? A: The equation for this decomposition reaction is: 2 H2 O2  2 H2 O + O2?
the reaction 2al2o3  4al  3o2 is a decomposition reaction	Do q: What is the chemical equation for the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide (H2 O2 ) to water (H2 O) and oxygen (O2 )? A: The equation for this decomposition reaction is: 2 H2 O2  2 H2 O + O2?
democritus thought that atoms are motionless	Do but even in solids, atoms are constantly vibrating in place?
democritus thought that atoms are separated from each other by empty space	Do in addition, atoms arent really indestructible because they can be changed to other forms of matter or energy?
democritus ideas were based on experimental evidence	Do he based his theory on experimental evidence, not on lucky guesses?
the mean and median of the same set of values are always the same	Do q: What is the range of heights in the sample of children in the previous question? A: The range is 62 cm - 54 cm = 8 cm?
the average of a set of values is also called the mode	Do in fact, sometimes these three statistics are very different from one another for the same sample?
the direction of motion is a vector	Do 1? A: The vectors would look like this:?
a millimeter is longer than a centimeter	Do in a 100-meter sprint, that distance is 100 meters?
to measure distance in si units you could use a meter stick	Do for example, you might measure the distance from the bottom to the top of a sheet of paper in centimeters and the distance from your house to your school in kilometers?
sound waves from a police car siren move away from the car in all directions	Do q: What will the siren sound like to listener A after the police car passes him? A: The siren will suddenly get lower in pitch because the sound waves will be much more spread out and have a lower frequency?
sound waves that are closer together have a lower frequency	Do q: What will the siren sound like to listener A after the police car passes him? A: The siren will suddenly get lower in pitch because the sound waves will be much more spread out and have a lower frequency?
as the frequency of sound waves gets lower a listener perceives the sound to have a higher pitch	Do q: What will the siren sound like to listener A after the police car passes him? A: The siren will suddenly get lower in pitch because the sound waves will be much more spread out and have a lower frequency?
earth has two north poles and two south poles	Do a magnetic pole is the north or south end of a magnet, where the magnet exerts the most force?
a compass needle always points to earths geographic north pole	Do this naming convention was adopted a long time ago to avoid confusion?
the like poles of two magnets always attract each other	Do this naming convention was adopted a long time ago to avoid confusion?
earths magnetic field is a huge region	Do uRL:?
all machines make work easier	Do how much work is needed to overcome friction in a machine depends on the machines efficiency?
you can get more work out of a machine than you put into it	Do how much work is needed to overcome friction in a machine depends on the machines efficiency?
newtons law of gravity was accepted for more than 200 years	Do in science, a theory is a broad explanation that is supported by a great deal of evidence?
newtons law of gravity explains why gravity occurs	Do these ideas about space-time and gravity became known as Einsteins theory of general relativity?
einstein explained gravity with his theory of universal gravitation	Do these ideas about space-time and gravity became known as Einsteins theory of general relativity?
the less an elastic material is stretched or compressed the greater the force it exerts	Do then the bungee cord springs back to its original shape, and the jumper bounces upward?
elastic force causes an elastic material to spring back to its original shape after being stretched or compressed	Do then the bungee cord springs back to its original shape, and the jumper bounces upward?
an elastic material offers no resistance to forces that change its shape	Do then the bungee cord springs back to its original shape, and the jumper bounces upward?
most of the electromagnetic radiation on earth comes from the sun	Do electromagnetic waves with shorter wavelengths have higher frequencies and more energy?
the only electromagnetic waves in sunlight are ultraviolet infrared and visible light	Do q: What sources of infrared light are shown in the diagram? A: The sources in the diagram are people and light bulbs, but all living things and most other objects give off infrared light?
ultraviolet light has more energy than visible light	Do q: What sources of infrared light are shown in the diagram? A: The sources in the diagram are people and light bulbs, but all living things and most other objects give off infrared light?
electromagnetic waves need a medium in order to transfer energy	Do uRL:  Q: How do microwaves transfer energy inside a microwave oven? A: They transfer energy through the air inside the oven to the food?
electromagnetic waves may be converted to other forms of energy	Do when microwaves strike food in a microwave oven, they are absorbed and converted to thermal energy, which heats the food?
the atomic nucleus is always at the center of an orbital	Do 3, where are the two helium electrons most likely to be? A: The two electrons are most likely to be inside the sphere closest to the nucleus where the cloud is darkest?
bohrs atomic model explains all of the behaviors of electrons in atoms of all elements	Do however, it doesnt explain certain behaviors of electrons, except for those in the simplest atom, the hydrogen atom?
the electron cloud model of the atom is no longer accepted by most scientists	Do 3, where are the two helium electrons most likely to be? A: The two electrons are most likely to be inside the sphere closest to the nucleus where the cloud is darkest?
like protons and neutrons electrons consist of smaller particles	Do uRL:?
an electron has about the same mass as a proton	Do all atoms have the same number of electrons as protons, so the positive and negative charges cancel out, making atoms electrically neutral?
atoms always have the same number of electrons as protons	Do uRL:?
no two elements are exactly alike	Do eventually they discovered dozens of different elements?
carbon is the most common element in living things	Do this allows carbon to form a huge number of different substances?
aristotle correctly identified four of the elements	Do eventually they discovered dozens of different elements?
only endothermic chemical reactions involve energy	Do in an endothermic reaction, it takes more energy to break bonds in the reactants than is released when new bonds form in the products?
in an endothermic reaction it takes less energy to break bonds in the reactants than is released when new bonds form in the products	Do in an endothermic reaction, it takes more energy to break bonds in the reactants than is released when new bonds form in the products?
a constant input of energy is needed to keep an endothermic reaction going	Do in an endothermic reaction, it takes more energy to break bonds in the reactants than is released when new bonds form in the products?
when work is done energy is transferred from one object to another	Do where does this boy get his energy? A: He gets energy from the food he eats?
the si unit for energy is the newton	Do the energy needed to do this work is 20 N m, or 20 J?
anything that is moving has kinetic energy	Do an example is a moving tennis racket?
energy conversion means saving energy	Do however, the force does get weaker the farther apart the objects are?
any form of energy can change into any other form of energy	Do however, the force does get weaker the farther apart the objects are?
one form of energy can change into two or more other forms of energy	Do however, the force does get weaker the farther apart the objects are?
electrons can occupy the spaces between energy levels	Do 1, where would you find electrons that have the most energy? A: Electrons with the most energy would be found in energy level IV?
electrons in the first energy level have the least amount of energy	Do 1, where would you find electrons that have the most energy? A: Electrons with the most energy would be found in energy level IV?
valence electrons determine how reactive an element is	Do how many electrons does it have in its outermost energy level? How stable do you think a neon atom is? A: A neon atom has two electrons in energy level I and its remaining eight electrons in energy level II, which can?
enzymes work by providing activation energy	Do both are described in the Figure 1.2?
enzymes are used up in the reactions they catalyze	Do enzymes are proteins that are synthesized in the cells that need them, based on instructions encoded in the cells DNA?
about 100 different enzymes are needed for human life	Do both are described in the Figure 1.2?
in an exothermic reaction the reactants have more stored chemical energy than the products	Do in an exothermic reaction, it takes less energy to break bonds in the reactants than is released when new bonds form in the products?
in an exothermic reaction it takes more energy to break bonds in the reactants than is released when new bonds form in the products	Do in an exothermic reaction, it takes less energy to break bonds in the reactants than is released when new bonds form in the products?
all combustion reactions are exothermic reactions	Do if you were standing near the fire, you would also feel its heat?
a steam engine is an external combustion engine	Do a steam engine is an external combustion engine?
an external combustion engine burns fuel to heat air	Do a steam engine is an external combustion engine?
external combustion engines are no longer in use today	Do a steam engine is an external combustion engine?
all materials respond to magnetic force	Do clearly, the magnetic properties of magnetite have been recognized for thousands of years?
magnetism is due to the movement of electrons within atoms	Do they include iron, cobalt, and nickel?
if you stroke an iron nail with a bar magnet the nail will become a temporary magnet	Do can you explain why?
only some changes in speed or direction are caused by forces	Do in addition, Carson applies forces to his scooter to control its speed and direction?
the force required to change an objects motion depends on the objects mass	Do the Newton was named for the scientist Sir Isaac Newton, who is famous for his laws of motion and gravity?
force is a vector	Do 1) could represent these forces?
energy can change from one form to another	Do the guitar produces sound energy when the guitarist plucks the strings?
the energy of moving electrons is called chemical energy	Do the guitar produces sound energy when the guitarist plucks the strings?
the pitch of sound depends on the amplitude of sound waves	Do 1, have low-frequency waves?
dogs can hear sounds that are too high in pitch for humans to hear	Do 1, have low-frequency waves?
only rough surfaces have friction between them	Do this creates friction?
heavier objects have less friction with the floor than lighter objects	Do did you ever try to furniture across the floor? Its harder to overcome friction between a heavier piece of furniture and the floor than between lighter pieces and the floor?
friction produces heat because it causes molecules to move faster and have more energy	Do they slide over each other more easily, so there is less friction?
scientists think that leptons and quarks are held together by neutrinos	Do scientists continue to search for evidence that will allow them to explain these aspects of force and matter as well?
in ordinary matter virtually all quarks are strange quarks and charm quarks	Do based on this information, what is the total electric charge of a proton? Of a neutron? A: These combinations of quarks give protons a total electric charge of +1 (2/3 + 2/3 - 1/3 = 1) and neutrons a total electric charge of 0 (2/3 - 1/3 - 1/3 = 0)?
radioactive nuclei undergo decay because they are unstable	Do after the nucleus emits the gamma particle, it still has two protons, so the atom is still the same element?
in gamma decay both particles of matter and energy are emitted	Do its no surprise that they can penetrate and damage cells deep inside the body?
gamma decay results in a nucleus with a different number of protons	Do after the nucleus emits the gamma particle, it still has two protons, so the atom is still the same element?
higherenergy electromagnetic waves have lower frequencies	Do 1, is called the electromagnetic spectrum?
gamma rays have wavelengths shorter than the nucleus of an atom	Do thats 10 quadrillion waves per second! Because of their high frequencies, gamma rays are also the most energetic of all electromagnetic waves?
gamma rays from space are absorbed by earths atmosphere	Do a: Gamma rays would destroy most living things on Earth because they have so much energy?
gravity acts only between objects that are touching	Do less massive objects also have less gravity than more massive objects?
there is gravitational attraction between you and every object around you	Do less massive objects also have less gravity than more massive objects?
weight is measured with a balance	Do uRL:?
the groups in question 1 are the only groups in the periodic that contain elements in more than one class	Do groups 13-16 fall between the transition metals (in groups 3-12) and the nonmetals called halogens (in group 17)?
carbon is a metalloid	Do all of them are solids at room temperature?
all group 15 elements are very reactive	Do all of them are solids at room temperature?
the halogen named astatine is radioactive	Do compared with most other elements, halogens have relatively low melting and boiling points?
all halogens are gases at room temperature	Do compared with most other elements, halogens have relatively low melting and boiling points?
the main role of the middle ear is to change sound waves to electrical impulses	Do it also shows the specific structures in each part of the ear?
you perceive a sound as soon as the sound waves strike your eardrum	Do q: How might cupping his hands behind his ears help the boy pictured in the opening image hear better? A: His hands might help the pinna of his ears catch sound waves and direct them into the ear canal?
loud sounds cause loss of hearing by damaging the tiny bones of the middle ear	Do total hearing loss is called deafness?
louder sounds damage hearing more quickly than softer sounds	Do an example of a sound this intense is the sound of a car horn?
hearing loss caused by loud sounds is temporary	Do you can see examples in the Figure 1.2?
heat is a form of energy	Do q: How is thermal energy transferred in an oven? A: Thermal energy of the hot oven is transferred to the cooler food, raising its temperature?
temperature measures the average kinetic energy of particles	Do q: How is thermal energy transferred in an oven? A: Thermal energy of the hot oven is transferred to the cooler food, raising its temperature?
thermal energy always moves from cooler to warmer substances	Do q: How is thermal energy transferred in an oven? A: Thermal energy of the hot oven is transferred to the cooler food, raising its temperature?
only the particles of warm matter are in constant random motion	Do in the opening photo above, conduction occurs between particles of metal in the cookie sheet and anything cooler that comes into contact with ithopefully, not someones bare hands!?
conduction occurs when particles of matter collide	Do in the opening photo above, conduction occurs between particles of metal in the cookie sheet and anything cooler that comes into contact with ithopefully, not someones bare hands!?
in a hotwater heating system hot water transfers thermal energy to radiators by thermal radiation	Do regardless of the type of heating system in a home, the basic function is the same: to produce thermal energy and transfer it to air throughout the house?
in both hotwater and warmair heating systems thermal energy is transferred through the air in each room by conduction	Do regardless of the type of heating system in a home, the basic function is the same: to produce thermal energy and transfer it to air throughout the house?
hydrocarbons are the simplest type of carbon compounds	Do in other words, they are unsaturated with hydrogen atoms?
the size of hydrocarbon molecules influences their melting and boiling points	Do thats why they are used in floor wax and similar products?
hydrocarbons consist only of carbon and hydrogen atoms	Do in other words, they are unsaturated with hydrogen atoms?
hydrogen and alkali metals are very reactive	Do some are even soft enough to cut with a knife, like the sodium pictured in the Figure 1.1?
the most reactive alkali metal is lithium	Do uRL:?
the alkali metal named francium is radioactive	Do uRL:?
water is a polar compound	Do q: If a molecule is polar, how might this affect its interactions with nearby molecules of the same compound? A: Opposite charges on different molecules of the same compound might cause the molecules to be attracted to each other?
hydrogen bonds are very strong bonds	Do q: If a molecule is polar, how might this affect its interactions with nearby molecules of the same compound? A: Opposite charges on different molecules of the same compound might cause the molecules to be attracted to each other?
polar molecules tend to have lower boiling points than nonpolar molecules	Do 1 do you think is more polar, ammonia or water?
an inclined plane is one of six types of simple machines	Do the trade-off is that the object must be moved over a greater distance than if it were moved straight up to the higher elevation?
mechanical advantage is the ratio of input force to output force	Do less force is needed to move objects up the gentler slope, yet the objects attain the same elevation as they would if more force were used to push them up the steeper slope?
the more gradual the slope of an inclined plane the greater its mechanical advantage is	Do less force is needed to move objects up the gentler slope, yet the objects attain the same elevation as they would if more force were used to push them up the steeper slope?
only moving objects have inertia	Do uRL:?
newtons first law of motion is also called the law of inertia	Do why does this happen? A: The brakes stop the car but not your body, so your body keeps moving forward because of inertia?
once an object starts moving inertia keeps it moving without any additional force being applied to the object	Do once its on the ground, friction will slow its motion?
an 80decibel sound is 20 times louder than a 60decibel sound	Do q: How much louder than a 20-decibel whisper is the 60-decibel sound of a vacuum cleaner? A: The vacuum cleaner is 10,000 times louder than the whisper!?
as distance from the sound source increases the area covered by the sound waves decreases	Do q: Why can low-amplitude sounds like whispers be heard only over short distances? A: The sound waves already have so little energy that spreading them out over a wider area quickly reduces their intensity below the level of hearing?
amplitude is a measure of the size of sound waves	Do the unit of intensity is the decibel (dB)?
all cars have at least eight cylinders	Do the more cylinders a car engine has, the more powerful its engine can be?
the more pistons a car has the greater the cars power is	Do the more cylinders a car engine has, the more powerful its engine can be?
a kilogram equals onethousandth of a gram	Do 37 inches (a meter) of wire, but a yard is only 36 inches, so if he buys a yard of wire he wont have enough?
in an ionic bond the metallic ion is always a positive ion	Do it is commonly called table salt?
positive ions are named by adding the suffix ide to the first part of the element name	Do it is commonly called table salt?
ionic bonds form only between metals and nonmetals	Do for example, alkali metals in group 1 form ionic bonds with halogen nonmetals in group 17?
ionic compounds form when ions of two different elements share electrons	Do solutions of ionic compounds can be used to restore the ions?
an ionic compound is always neutral in charge	Do q: What is the name of the ionic compound that is composed of positive barium ions and negative iodide ions? A: The compound is named barium iodide?
the process in which ions form is called ionization	Do uRL:?
ions are very unreactive	Do if a fluorine atom gains an electron, it becomes a fluoride ion with an electric charge of -1?
ions are deflected by a magnetic field	Do ions are also deflected by a magnetic field, as you saw in the opening image of the northern lights?
only unsaturated hydrocarbons have isomers	Do some hydrocarbons with many more carbon atoms have billions of isomers! Q: Why does the number of carbon atoms in a hydrocarbon determine how many isomers it has? A: The more carbon atoms there are, the greater the number of possible arrangements of carbon atoms?
some hydrocarbons have billions of isomers	Do some hydrocarbons with many more carbon atoms have billions of isomers! Q: Why does the number of carbon atoms in a hydrocarbon determine how many isomers it has? A: The more carbon atoms there are, the greater the number of possible arrangements of carbon atoms?
the more branching an isomer has the lower its melting point is	Do a: The boiling point of iso-pentane is 28  C, and the boiling point of neo-pentane is 10  C?
all isotopes form naturally	Do uRL:?
all isotopes are radioactive	Do in contrast, the carbon isotopes called carbon-12 and carbon-13 are stable?
things with kinetic energy can do work	Do for example, the spinning saw blade in the photo above is doing the work of cutting through a piece of metal?
an objects mass has a greater influence on its kinetic energy than does its velocity	Do for example, the spinning saw blade in the photo above is doing the work of cutting through a piece of metal?
energy can be measured in the si unit n  m	Do because his mass is twice as great as Juans, his kinetic energy is twice as great: m2 2 KE = 12  80 kg  (1 m s ) = 40 kg  s2 = 40 N  m, or 40 J Q: What is Juans kinetic energy if he speeds up to 2 m/s from 1 m/s? A: By doubling his velocity, Juan increases his kinetic energy by a factor of four: m2 2 KE = 12  40 kg  (2 m s ) = 80 kg  s2 = 80 N  m, or 80 J?
the particles of solids do not have enough energy to move	Do the theory that all matter consists of constantly moving particles is called the kinetic theory of matter?
scientists think that the particles of all matter are in constant motion	Do the theory that all matter consists of constantly moving particles is called the kinetic theory of matter?
particles of liquids have enough energy to separate from other liquid particles	Do the theory that all matter consists of constantly moving particles is called the kinetic theory of matter?
when momentum is transferred from one object to another their combined momentum remains the same	Do uRL:?
when light reflects off a smooth surface it forms a clear image	Do it is focused rays of light that make a copy of an object, like a picture projected on a screen?
the image formed when light rays are reflected as described in question 5 is blurry or fuzzy	Do it is focused rays of light that make a copy of an object, like a picture projected on a screen?
the angles of reflection and incidence are measured relative to a line that is parallel to the reflective surface	Do the law is illustrated in the Figure 1.3?
a lens reflects light and forms an image	Do its the only one that produces a right-side up image?
the less curved the surface of a lens is the more the lens refracts light	Do the two types of lenses have different shapes, so they bend light and form images in different ways?
a concave lens forms only real images	Do the two types of lenses have different shapes, so they bend light and form images in different ways?
a second class lever always has an ideal mechanical advantage less than 1	Do this occurs only with first some first-class levers?
a third class lever always applies the output force over a greater distance than the input force	Do why is this useful? A: By moving more quickly over the floor, the broom does the work faster?
sunlight carries the complete range of wavelengths of electromagnetic waves	Do 1 shows all the waves in the spectrum?
ultraviolet light can be used to kill bacteria in food	Do when all of the wavelengths of visible light are combined, as they are in sunlight, visible light appears white?
lipids are biochemical compounds that include fats and oils	Do examples of both types of lipids are pictured in the Figure 1.1?
lipids known as fats consist of saturated fatty acids	Do the unsaturated fatty acid has a double bond between two of its carbon atoms?
unsaturated fatty acids contain only single bonds between carbon atoms	Do the unsaturated fatty acid has a double bond between two of its carbon atoms?
a longitudinal wave is a type of mechanical wave	Do uRL:?
in a longitudinal wave particles of the medium vibrate in a direction that is perpendicular to the direction the wave travels	Do uRL:?
earthquakes cause longitudinal waves called p waves	Do the rarefactions are the places where the vertical lines are farthest apart?
earths magnetic poles have switched places repeatedly in the past	Do we think of todays magnetic field direction as normal, but thats only because its what were used to?
scientists know for certain why magnetic field reversals occur	Do we think of todays magnetic field direction as normal, but thats only because its what were used to?
after magma hardens the alignment of magnetic domains reverses with each magnetic field reversal	Do the last reversal was less than a million years ago?
only bar magnets have north and south magnetic poles	Do pieces of a magnet always have both north and south poles no matter how many times you cut the magnet?
if you cut a bar magnet in half one half will have just a north pole and the other half will have just a south pole	Do pieces of a magnet always have both north and south poles no matter how many times you cut the magnet?
when two magnets are brought close together their magnetic fields interact	Do the lines of force of north and south poles attract each other whereas those of two north poles repel each other?
the mechanical advantage of a machine may be less than equal to or greater than 1	Do the equation yields the factor by which the machine changes the input force when the machine is actually used in the real world?
mechanical waves can travel through liquids and gases but not through solids	Do only the energy of the wave travels through the medium?
particles of the medium actually travel along with a mechanical wave	Do only the energy of the wave travels through the medium?
a longitudinal wave is a combination of a transverse wave and a surface wave	Do q: How do you think surface waves are related to transverse and longitudinal waves? A: A surface wave is combination of a transverse wave and a longitudinal wave?
elements in a given period of mendeleevs table have similar properties	Do in Mendeleevs table, each period contains eight elements, and then the pattern repeats in the next row?
only some of the unknown elements that mendeleev predicted were ever discovered	Do it helped scientists discover new elements and made sense of those that were already known?
the latticelike structure of a metal consists of negative metal ions in a sea of electrons	Do therefore, the metal can bend rather than crack when the hammer hits it?
a metallic bond forms when one metal atom shares a pair of electrons with another metal atom	Do for example, when oxygen atoms bond together they form oxygen molecules in which two oxygen atoms share two pairs of valence electrons equally, so neither atom becomes charged?
metallic bonds form only between atoms of two or more different metals	Do for example, when oxygen atoms bond together they form oxygen molecules in which two oxygen atoms share two pairs of valence electrons equally, so neither atom becomes charged?
the metalloid class is the smallest class of elements	Do those with exactly four electrons in their outer energy level (silicon and germanium) may act like either metals or nonmetals, depending on the other elements in the reaction?
some metalloids are liquids at room temperature	Do uRL:?
metalloids fall between metals and nonmetals in the periodic table	Do it is the number of electrons in the outer energy level of atoms that determines most of the properties of elements?
metals are the largest of the three classes of elements	Do the majority of metals are transition metals?
some metals are gases at room temperature	Do the majority of metals are transition metals?
the properties of metals depend mainly on their number and arrangement of neutrons	Do this tendency to give up electrons also explains other properties of metals such as lithium?
the electromagnetic spectrum is defined as the full range of colors of visible light	Do the waves used in radar guns are microwaves?
microwaves have lower frequencies than other radio waves	Do uRL:?
microwave signals can be interrupted by buildings and other obstructions	Do why do you think such tall towers are used? A: Microwaves can be interrupted by buildings and other obstructions, so cell towers must be placed high above the ground to prevent the interruption of cell phone signals?
the shape of a mirrors surface determines the type of image that it forms	Do it appears to be on the other side of the mirror from the girl?
the type of mirror in question 6 always forms real images	Do the term mirror image refers to how left and right are reversed in an image compared with the object?
the type of mirror in question 8 always forms lifesized images	Do the term mirror image refers to how left and right are reversed in an image compared with the object?
the modern periodic table is based on mendeleevs earlier periodic table	Do the modern table has more elements than Mendeleevs table because many elements have been discovered since Mendeleevs time?
each element has a unique atomic number	Do the modern table has more elements than Mendeleevs table because many elements have been discovered since Mendeleevs time?
all the periods of the modern periodic table contain the same number of elements	Do the modern table has more elements than Mendeleevs table because many elements have been discovered since Mendeleevs time?
in covalent compounds elements are held together by the force of attraction between oppositely charged atoms	Do it consists of one hydrogen atom and one chlorine atom, as you can see in the Figure 1.1?
covalent compounds form structures called crystals	Do it consists of one hydrogen atom and one chlorine atom, as you can see in the Figure 1.1?
all objects with mass have momentum	Do 1 m/s = 75 kg  m/s?
the faster an object is moving the harder it is to stop	Do he would also be harder to stop?
aspects of motion include speed and direction	Do the meteor is shooting through the atmosphere toward Earth, burning up as it goes?
in question 6 the bus drivers frame of reference is the passenger directly behind him	Do as the bus goes by, it momentarily blocks your view of these objects, and this helps you detect the bus motion?
in question 6 the frame of reference of an outside observer of the bus might be a house across the street	Do as the bus goes by, it momentarily blocks your view of these objects, and this helps you detect the bus motion?
people have been using sound to make music for thousands of years	Do this changes the pitch of the sounds, or how high or low the sounds seem to a listener?
there are a total of 50 different kinds of musical instruments	Do other stringed instruments include guitars and harps?
all musical instruments make sound by causing something to vibrate	Do other stringed instruments include guitars and harps?
atoms of all elements have neutrons in their nucleus	Do uRL:?
neutrons have a negative electrical charge	Do 7 1017 meters?
a neutron has about the same diameter as a proton	Do 7 1017 meters?
atoms of the same element may differ in their numbers of neutrons	Do therefore, it must have 9 neutrons (8 + 9 = 17)?
if you dont try to stop a rolling skateboard it will keep moving forever	Do in the picture, Jerod is pressing down with his heels, so the skateboard turns toward his toes?
pressing down on one side of a skateboard causes it to turn toward the opposite side	Do this causes the skateboard to turn in the opposite direction?
if you run into a curb on a skateboard you will fall forward off your skateboard because there is an unbalanced force applied to your body	Do in the picture, Jerod is pressing down with his heels, so the skateboard turns toward his toes?
isaac newton was the first person to observe the effects of gravity	Do it explains the motion of objects not only on Earth but in outer space as well?
newton would agree that all objects on earth exert a gravitational pull on earth	Do it explains the motion of objects not only on Earth but in outer space as well?
newtons law of gravity was the first scientific law that applied to everything in the universe	Do it explains the motion of objects not only on Earth but in outer space as well?
acceleration occurs whenever an object is acted on by an unbalanced force	Do therefore, there is a net forward force on the skates?
there is a direct relationship between acceleration and mass	Do how will this affect his acceleration around the track? A: Tonys greater mass will result in less acceleration for the same amount of force?
increasing the force acting on an object increases its acceleration	Do how will this affect his acceleration around the track? A: Tonys greater mass will result in less acceleration for the same amount of force?
forces always act in pairs	Do jerod will be pushed forward with more force, and this will make him go faster and farther?
a stronger action always results in a stronger reaction	Do jerod will be pushed forward with more force, and this will make him go faster and farther?
action and reaction forces always cancel each other out	Do if it didnt, you would go right through it or else it would tip over?
action and reaction forces always act on the same object	Do if it didnt, you would go right through it or else it would tip over?
noble gases are the elements in group 17 of the periodic table	Do in this reaction, sodium donates an electron and chlorine accepts it, giving each element an octet of valence electrons?
noble gases are nonreactive elements	Do therefore, noble gases are rarely involved in chemical reactions and almost never form compounds with other elements?
noble gases have high boiling points	Do therefore, noble gases have eight valence electrons?
there are fewer nonmetals than there are elements in any other class	Do they hold onto their electrons so they cannot flow?
all nonmetals are very reactive	Do other properties of nonmetals are illustrated and described in the Figure 1.1?
nonmetals are located on the right side of the periodic table	Do the number of electrons in the outer energy level of an atom determines many of its properties?
most of the elements that make up the human body are nonmetals	Do they hold onto their electrons so they cannot flow?
in a nuclear power plant the energy from nuclear reactions is used to boil water	Do the spinning turbine runs a generator, which produces electricity?
nuclear power plants do not produce air pollution	Do uRL:?
nuclear energy is a renewable energy resource	Do 1, releases as much energy as burning 1,000 kilograms of coal! Q: What causes the nucleus of uranium-235 atom to fission? A: Another particle collides with it?
nuclear fusion produces dangerous radioactive wastes	Do a neutron and a tremendous amount of energy are also released?
the fuel needed for nuclear fusion is plentiful	Do a neutron and a tremendous amount of energy are also released?
scientists are a long way from developing the technology needed to use nuclear fusion to produce electricity	Do a neutron and a tremendous amount of energy are also released?
the backbone of a nucleic acid consists of alternating nitrogen bases	Do phosphorus is the only element that is identified with nucleic acids?
dna is found only in the nucleus of cells	Do how do you think the instructions encoded in DNA reach the cytoplasm so they can be used to make proteins? A: After RNA copies the instructions in DNA, it carries them from the nucleus to a site of protein synthesis in the cytoplasm, where the instructions are translated into a protein?
optical instruments use lenses and mirrors to form images	Do q: What is an image? A: An image is a copy of an object created by the reflection or refraction of visible light?
the magnifications of all the lenses of a microscope are added together to yield the overall magnification	Do these discoveries changed our ideas about the human body and the nature of life itself?
it takes earth 24 hours to complete each orbit	Do the line encircling Earth shows the moons actual orbit, which results from the combination of v and a?
comets do not have orbital motion	Do orbital motion occurs whenever an object is moving forward and at the same time is pulled by gravity toward another object?
an object with orbital motion is constantly accelerating	Do orbital motion occurs whenever an object is moving forward and at the same time is pulled by gravity toward another object?
the strength of an acid depends on how many hydrogen ions it produces when it dissolves in water	Do calcium carbonate (CaCO3 ), a base in antacids, is a weak base because only a small percentage of it breaks down into ions in water?
an example of a weak base is sodium hydroxide	Do calcium carbonate (CaCO3 ), a base in antacids, is a weak base because only a small percentage of it breaks down into ions in water?
acidity is the hydrogen ion concentration of a solution	Do the strongest base on the scale is liquid drain cleaner, which has a pH of 14?
photosynthesis changes light energy to chemical energy	Do q: How do living things get energy from glucose? A: They break bonds in glucose and release the stored energy in the process of cellular respiration?
photosynthesis takes place in a single chemical reaction	Do a tremendous amount of photosynthesis takes place in the plants of this lush tropi- cal rainforest?
a positiontime graph shows how far an object has traveled at any given time since it started moving	Do 1, what distance has the object traveled from the starting point by the time 5 seconds have elapsed? A: The object has traveled a distance of 50 meters?
a positiontime graph shows the directions the moving object has traveled relative to the starting position	Do 1, what distance has the object traveled from the starting point by the time 5 seconds have elapsed? A: The object has traveled a distance of 50 meters?
the steeper the line on a positiontime graph the faster the objects motion is changing	Do the steeper the line is, the greater the slope of the line is and the faster the objects motion is changing?
a stretched rubber band has potential energy	Do this gives her potential energy?
food and batteries both contain potential energy	Do nuclei of radioactive elements such as uranium are unstable, so they break apart and release the stored energy?
a cannonball shot from a cannon has projectile motion	Do 3? A: You would add a line pointing straight down from the cannon to the ground?
an object with projectile motion constantly changes direction	Do 2 what happens if you aim at the bulls eye instead of above it?
an example of an acid is hcl	Do some other uses of acids are be seen in the Figure 1.3?
all acids taste sour	Do some other uses of acids are be seen in the Figure 1.3?
litmus paper is the only indicator of acids	Do some other uses of acids are be seen in the Figure 1.3?
an example of a base is sodium hydroxide naoh	Do this can be represented by the equation: H O 2 NaOH OH + Na+?
bases feel slippery to the touch	Do other uses of bases can be seen in the Figure 1.2?
bases can react with metals	Do other uses of bases can be seen in the Figure 1.2?
bases turn red litmus paper blue	Do uRL:  Drawing of red litmus paper turning blue in a base?
all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed through space	Do 5 times in just 1 second!?
higherfrequency electromagnetic waves have less energy	Do 5 times in just 1 second!?
some electromagnetic waves have wavelengths shorter than the diameter of an atom	Do q: Which electromagnetic waves do you think have higher frequencies: visible light or X rays? A: X rays are harmful but visible light is harmless, so you can infer that X rays have higher frequencies than visible light?
all electromagnetic waves have frequencies of less than 1000 waves per second	Do 5 times in just 1 second!?
proteins are the most numerous and diverse biochemical compounds	Do 2)?
there are hundreds of different amino acids	Do protein molecules consist of one or more chains of small molecules called amino acids?
some proteins carry other materials in the blood	Do 2)?
protons are one of three main types of particles that make up atoms	Do the one proton in a hydrogen nucleus, for example, gives it a charge of +1, and the two protons in a helium nucleus give it a charge of +2?
protons are found only in the atomic nucleus	Do the one proton in a hydrogen nucleus, for example, gives it a charge of +1, and the two protons in a helium nucleus give it a charge of +2?
protons have less mass than electrons	Do the one proton in a hydrogen nucleus, for example, gives it a charge of +1, and the two protons in a helium nucleus give it a charge of +2?
the ideal mechanical advantage of a pulley is equal to the number of rope segments pulling up on the load	Do for example if 400 Newtons of force were applied to the pulley, the pulley would apply 1600 Newtons of force to the load?
a moveable pulley changes the direction of the input force	Do of Rope Segments Pulling Up 1 Ideal Mechani- cal Advantage 1 Change Direction Force? yes Single moveable pulley Zip-line pulley 2 2 no Compound pulley (fixed & moveable pulleys) Crane pulley 2 2 varies in of?
a zipline pulley is a moveable pulley	Do of Rope Segments Pulling Up 1 Ideal Mechani- cal Advantage 1 Change Direction Force? yes Single moveable pulley Zip-line pulley 2 2 no Compound pulley (fixed & moveable pulleys) Crane pulley 2 2 varies in of?
all pulleys increase the force applied to the pulley	Do q: Can you guess what the pulley pictured above is used for? A: The pulley is used to lift heavy buckets full of water out of the well?
electromagnetic waves vary in their wavelengths and frequencies	Do it is outlined in the following Figure 1.1?
radio waves have the highest frequencies of all electromagnetic waves	Do it is outlined in the following Figure 1.1?
radio waves have the least energy of all electromagnetic waves	Do it is outlined in the following Figure 1.1?
radioactive decay is a chemical reaction	Do uRL:?
radioactive decay may change one element into another	Do uRL:?
certain chemical processes can change one element into another	Do q: So how can one element change into another? A: The starting element must be radioactive, and its nuclei must gain or lose protons?
all nuclei emit radiation	Do when they do, they become different elements?
all elements with more than 75 protons are unstable	Do when they do, they become different elements?
only radioactive elements have isotopes that are radioactive	Do they have only been created in labs?
radioactive isotopes are unstable because they have too many electrons	Do they have only been created in labs?
chemical changes occur because of chemical reactions	Do the general equation for this type of reaction is: Fuel + O2  CO2 + H2 O Q: How do the reactants in a chemical reaction turn into the products? A: Bonds break in the reactants, and new bonds form in the products?
an example of a chemical change is a candle burning	Do the products are carbon dioxide gas and water vapor?
all changes in matter are the result of chemical reactions	Do uRL:?
the solid lumps in cottage cheese are an example of a precipitate	Do uRL:?
the release of gas bubbles is a sign of a chemical reaction	Do uRL:?
less reactive elements replace more reactive elements in compounds	Do keep reading to learn more about these two types of reactions?
replacement reactions always involve ionic compounds	Do keep reading to learn more about these two types of reactions?
a single replacement reaction always involves two reactant compounds	Do keep reading to learn more about these two types of reactions?
based on his research rutherford thought that most of an atom consists of empty space	Do however, his student James Chadwick discovered them several years later?
rutherford predicted the existence of neutrons but failed to find them	Do however, his student James Chadwick discovered them several years later?
methane has a higher boiling point than ethane	Do what properties might larger alkanes have? A: Alkanes with more carbon atoms have higher boiling and melting points, so some of them are solids at room temperature?
some alkanes are solids are room temperature	Do what properties might larger alkanes have? A: Alkanes with more carbon atoms have higher boiling and melting points, so some of them are solids at room temperature?
different types of graph are best suited for representing different types of data	Do each type of graph is suitable for showing a different type of data?
a chemical equation is an example of a model	Do uRL:?
a road map is a threedimensional model	Do uRL:?
the input force is applied to the inclined plane of a screw	Do q: Why is it harder to turn a screw with more widely spaced threads? A: The screw moves farther with each turn when the threads are more widely space, so more force must be applied to turn the screw and cover the greater distance?
the mechanical advantage of a screw is always less than 1	Do q: Why is it harder to turn a screw with more widely spaced threads? A: The screw moves farther with each turn when the threads are more widely space, so more force must be applied to turn the screw and cover the greater distance?
in the picture above it takes it takes more turns of the screw on the right to go the same distance into the wood as the screw on the left	Do q: Why is it harder to turn a screw with more widely spaced threads? A: The screw moves farther with each turn when the threads are more widely space, so more force must be applied to turn the screw and cover the greater distance?
when measurements are used in a calculation the answer has the same number of significant figures as the measurement with the most signficant figures	Do therefore, the answer can have only one significant figure?
work is calculated with the equation work  forcedistance	Do the output distance may or may not be the same as the input distance?
a machine increases the amount of work that is done	Do for the same reason, if a machine increases the distance over which the force is applied, it must apply less force?
if a machine increases force it must apply the force over a longer distance	Do the output distance may or may not be the same as the input distance?
all sound waves begin with vibrating matter	Do so the answer to the riddle is both yes and no!?
vibrations spread through the air in all directions from a vibrating object	Do sound waves are mechanical waves, so they can travel only though matter and not through empty space?
sound waves can travel only through gases	Do so the answer to the riddle is both yes and no!?
sound waves are mechanical waves	Do sound waves are mechanical waves, so they can travel only though matter and not through empty space?
visible light includes all the wavelengths of light that the human eye can detect	Do by seeing infrared light, mosquitoes can tell where the warmest, blood-rich areas of the body are located?
some animals can see infrared or ultraviolet light	Do by seeing infrared light, mosquitoes can tell where the warmest, blood-rich areas of the body are located?
speed determines how far something moves in a given amount of time	Do speed may be constant, but often it varies from moment to moment?
the speed of sound is faster than the speed of light	Do the speed of sound may be very different through other matter or at other temperatures?
sound waves can travel only through matter	Do the speed of sound may be very different through other matter or at other temperatures?
sound waves travel more quickly through dry air than moist air	Do the speed of sound may be very different through other matter or at other temperatures?
electric charges can travel easily through dry air	Do this makes a shock more likely when you touch another object?
lightning is an example of static discharge	Do the discharge of electrons is the spark you see and the shock you feel?
a surface wave is one type of mechanical wave	Do uRL:?
an ocean wave is an example of a surface wave	Do the stronger the winds are blowing, the larger the waves are and the more energy they have?
the larger a surface wave is the more energy the wave has	Do the stronger the winds are blowing, the larger the waves are and the more energy they have?
an ocean wave carries water all the way across the ocean to the opposite shore	Do the stronger the winds are blowing, the larger the waves are and the more energy they have?
the chemical equation 2no  o2  2no2 represents a synthesis reaction	Do q: What is the chemical equation for the synthesis of nitrogen dioxide (NO2 ) from nitric oxide (NO) and oxygen (O2 )? A: The equation for this synthesis reaction is: 2NO + O2  2NO2?
the product of a synthesis reaction can be an element or a compound	Do q: What is the chemical equation for the synthesis of nitrogen dioxide (NO2 ) from nitric oxide (NO) and oxygen (O2 )? A: The equation for this synthesis reaction is: 2NO + O2  2NO2?
technology can have both positive and negative effects on people	Do the pollutants harm peoples health and contribute to global climate change?
thermal conduction occurs more quickly in certain solids and liquids than in gases	Do you will stay warmer if you can prevent the transfer of your own thermal energy to the outside air?
when you wear a down jacket it prevents the transfer of cold from the outside air to your body	Do you will stay warmer if you can prevent the transfer of your own thermal energy to the outside air?
only matter that feels warm has thermal energy	Do thats because the particles of all matter are in constant motion and have kinetic energy?
an object with a lower temperature always has less thermal energy than an object with a warmer temperature	Do thats because the particles of all matter are in constant motion and have kinetic energy?
the faster the particles of matter are moving the greater their kinetic energy is	Do thats because the particles of all matter are in constant motion and have kinetic energy?
the slower the particles of matter are moving the lower their temperature is	Do thats because the particles of all matter are in constant motion and have kinetic energy?
thermal energy is the total kinetic energy of moving particles of matter	Do radiation is the only way of transferring thermal energy that doesnt require matter?
only very hot objects radiate thermal energy	Do a lot of thermal energy is also radiating from the edges of the windows and door?
life on earth depends on thermal energy radiated from the sun	Do radiation is the only way of transferring thermal energy that doesnt require matter?
thomson won a nobel prize for his discovery of protons	Do you can see a picture of Thomson 1.1?
thomsons research proved daltons earlier claim about the smallest particles of matter	Do you can see a picture of Thomson 1.1?
all atoms are neutral in electric charge	Do when an atom gains electrons, it becomes a negative charged ion, or anion?
the formation of charged matter always depends on the transfer of electrons	Do this is the law of conservation of charge?
polarization occurs only when there is direct contact between two objects	Do the electrons move away from the rod, causing one side of the plate to become positively charged and the other side to become negatively charged?
electrons are transferred whenever there is friction between materials that differ in their ability to give up or accept electrons	Do explain why?
transition metals are high in density and very hard	Do many of the actinides do not occur in nature but are made in laboratories?
most transition metals are dull and brown in color	Do many of the actinides do not occur in nature but are made in laboratories?
a mechanical wave is a wave that travels through matter	Do you can see both in the Figure below?
the matter a mechanical wave travels through is called the medium	Do you can see both in the Figure below?
earthquake waves travel in all directions away from the disturbance that causes the earthquake	Do an S wave is modeled in the Figure 1.3?
s waves travel through underground rocks	Do an S wave is modeled in the Figure 1.3?
static friction prevents you from slipping when you walk on a sidewalk	Do static friction keeps their hands and feet from slipping?
sliding friction is stronger than static friction	Do all four types of friction are described below?
some animals use echolocation to find prey	Do 1 how a bat uses echolocation to find insect prey?
the use of reflected ultrasound waves to create images of organs inside the body is called ultrasonography	Do you can see a doctor using ultrasound in the Figure 1.3?
the smallest alkene is methene	Do carbon atoms always form four covalent bonds, regardless of the atoms to which it bonds?
smaller alkenes are gases at room temperature	Do the bananas on the right were stored without a bag?
alkynes are very common in nature	Do in fact, alkynes of all shapes are relatively rare in nature?
earth has north and south magnetic poles like a bar magnet	Do you can see it in the Figure 1.1?
there would be no northern lights without the magnetosphere	Do you can see it in the Figure 1.1?
people have only recently started using earths magnetic field for determining direction	Do you can see it in the Figure 1.1?
some birds may be able to sense earths magnetic field lines as a visual pattern	Do you can see it in the Figure 1.1?
valence electrons tend to be attracted by the nuclei of other atoms as much as or more than the nucleus of their own atom	Do as a result, they may be attracted as much or more by the nucleus of another atom than they are by their own nucleus?
all the elements in the same period of the periodic table have the same number of valence electrons	Do as a result, they may be attracted as much or more by the nucleus of another atom than they are by their own nucleus?
velocity is a vector	Do uRL:?
the si unit for velocity is kmh	Do 5 m/s west velocity =?
the steepness of a line graph is called its slope	Do this would show that acceleration is greater during this time period for the other sprinter?
in the graph in question 8 acceleration between seconds 2 and 4 is 10 ms	Do this would show that acceleration is greater during this time period for the other sprinter?
a clear image is produced by diffuse reflection	Do 1, the ripples in the water in the picture on the right cause diffuse reflection of the blooming trees?
regular reflection occurs when the reflective surface is very smooth	Do 1, the ripples in the water in the picture on the right cause diffuse reflection of the blooming trees?
when light is absorbed it transfers its energy to matter	Do why is this a good idea? A: Light-colored clothes absorb less light and reflect more light than dark-colored clothes, so they keep people cooler?
the sclera is the opaque white outer covering of the eye	Do no signals would be sent to the brain so vision would not be possible?
the lens is the only structure in the eye that focuses light	Do how might an injury to the visual cortex affect vision? A: An injury to the visual cortex might cause abnormal vision or even blindness regardless of how well the eyes can gather and focus light?
rods are nerve cells that sense different colors of light	Do no signals would be sent to the brain so vision would not be possible?
the vision problem called myopia is also called farsightedness	Do uRL:?
the vision problem called hyperopia is also called nearsightedness	Do uRL:?
the matter a wave travels through is called the material of the wave	Do the distance the particles move is measured by the waves amplitude?
the more energy a wave has the farther the particles of matter move	Do the distance the particles move is measured by the waves amplitude?
a wave with greater energy has a larger amplitude	Do these waves are high-amplitude waves and have a great deal of energy?
in all mechanical waves particles of the medium move up and down when the wave passes through them	Do the distance the particles move is measured by the waves amplitude?
a wave with a higher frequency has a longer wavelength	Do infer how wave frequency is related to wavelength?
the frequency of a wave is the same as the frequency of vibrations that caused the wave	Do )?
for waves of the same amplitude a higher frequency wave has less energy than a shorter frequency wave	Do )?
only sound waves can be reflected	Do we use these combinations of different blocks to make more complicated things?
refraction occurs because waves change speed in a new medium	Do we use these combinations of different blocks to make more complicated things?
constructive interference occurs when the crests of one wave overlap the troughs of the other wave	Do as the waves pass through each other, the crests combine to produce a wave with greater amplitude?
destructive interference occurs when the crests of two waves overlap	Do as the waves pass through each other, the crests and troughs cancel each other out to produce a wave with zero amplitude?
standing waves form only when waves reflect at a 90degree angle	Do try it yourself and see if the waves appear to stand still?
before einstein all scientists thought that electromagnetic energy consists of waves	Do in waves with higher frequencies, photons have more energy?
einstein based his waveparticle theory on experimental evidence	Do the theory posits that waves of photons traveling through space or matter make up electromagnetic radiation?
photons create interference patterns just as waves do	Do in waves with higher frequencies, photons have more energy?
the speed of most waves depends on the medium	Do uRL:?
waves generally travel fastest through gases and slowest through solids	Do uRL:?
the wavelength of visible light determines its color	Do a: Violet light has the greatest energy because it has the shortest wavelength?
wavelength usually is measured in meters	Do compressions are the places where particles of the medium crowd close together as the energy of the wave passes through?
for waves of the same amplitude shorter wavelength waves have less energy than longer wavelength waves	Do a: Violet light has the greatest energy because it has the shortest wavelength?
a wedge is a type of compound machine	Do 3 do you think would do the same amount of work with less input force? A: The wedge on the left has a greater mechanical advantage, so it would do the same amount of work with less input force?
the ratio of output force to input force for a wedge is always less than 1	Do 3 do you think would do the same amount of work with less input force? A: The wedge on the left has a greater mechanical advantage, so it would do the same amount of work with less input force?
a longer thinner wedge has a greater mechanical advantage than a shorter thicker wedge	Do 3 do you think would do the same amount of work with less input force? A: The wedge on the left has a greater mechanical advantage, so it would do the same amount of work with less input force?
a wedge with a greater mechanical advantage can do the same amount of work with less input force than a wedge with a lesser mechanical advantage	Do 3 do you think would do the same amount of work with less input force? A: The wedge on the left has a greater mechanical advantage, so it would do the same amount of work with less input force?
the input force may be applied either to the wheel or the axle of a wheel and axle	Do in a doorknob, the force is applied to the wheel by a persons hand?
a wheel and axle changes the direction of the input force	Do in a doorknob, the force is applied to the wheel by a persons hand?
a wheel and axle may either increase or decrease the input force	Do this allows you to turn the doorknob with relatively little effort, while the axle of the doorknob applies enough force to slide the bar into or out of the doorframe?
earths magnetic north pole is located at 90 degrees north latitude	Do the field is strongest at the poles, and lines of magnetic force move from the north to the south magnetic pole?
earth has a liquid inner core and solid outer core	Do the particles move as Earth spins on its axis?
any force that is used to move an object does work	Do the two weight lifters on the bottom right are both lifting the weight the same distance, but the weight lifter on the left is lifting a heavier weight, so she is doing more work?
you do more work playing basketball than you do studying for a test	Do however, he does more work when he first lifts a heavier box to chest height?
