Environmental scientists study the ways that humans affect the planet we live on. We hope to find better ways of living that can also help the environment. Ecologists study lifeforms and the environments they live in (Figure 1.16). They try to predict the chain reactions that could occur when one part of the ecosystem is disrupted. 	study of earths weather	1.g
Environmental scientists study the ways that humans affect the planet we live on. We hope to find better ways of living that can also help the environment. Ecologists study lifeforms and the environments they live in (Figure 1.16). They try to predict the chain reactions that could occur when one part of the ecosystem is disrupted. 	study of earthquakes	2.f
Environmental scientists study the ways that humans affect the planet we live on. We hope to find better ways of living that can also help the environment. Ecologists study lifeforms and the environments they live in (Figure 1.16). They try to predict the chain reactions that could occur when one part of the ecosystem is disrupted. 	study of earths oceans	3.b
Environmental scientists study the ways that humans affect the planet we live on. We hope to find better ways of living that can also help the environment. Ecologists study lifeforms and the environments they live in (Figure 1.16). They try to predict the chain reactions that could occur when one part of the ecosystem is disrupted. 	study of solid earth	4.c
Environmental scientists study the ways that humans affect the planet we live on. We hope to find better ways of living that can also help the environment. Ecologists study lifeforms and the environments they live in (Figure 1.16). They try to predict the chain reactions that could occur when one part of the ecosystem is disrupted. 	study of human effects on earth	5.d
Environmental scientists study the ways that humans affect the planet we live on. We hope to find better ways of living that can also help the environment. Ecologists study lifeforms and the environments they live in (Figure 1.16). They try to predict the chain reactions that could occur when one part of the ecosystem is disrupted. 	study of all aspects of planet earth	6.e
Environmental scientists study the ways that humans affect the planet we live on. We hope to find better ways of living that can also help the environment. Ecologists study lifeforms and the environments they live in (Figure 1.16). They try to predict the chain reactions that could occur when one part of the ecosystem is disrupted. 	study of the universe	7.a
Geology is the study of the solid Earth. Geologists study how rocks and minerals form. The way mountains rise up is part of geology. The way mountains erode away is another part. Geologists also study fossils and Earths history. There are many other branches of geology. There is so much to know about our home planet that most geologists become specialists in one area. For example, a mineralogist studies minerals, as seen in (Figure 1.11). Some volcanologists brave molten lava to study volcanoes. Seismologists monitor earthquakes worldwide to help protect people and property from harm (Figure 1.11). Paleontologists are interested in fossils and how ancient organisms lived. Scientists who compare the geology of other planets to Earth are planetary geologists. Some geologists study the Moon. Others look for petroleum. Still others specialize in studying soil. Some geologists can tell how old rocks are and determine how different rock layers formed. There is probably an expert in almost anything you can think of related to Earth! Geologists might study rivers and lakes, the underground water found between soil and rock particles, or even water that is frozen in glaciers. Earth scientists also need geographers who explore the features of Earths surface and work with cartographers, who make maps. Studying the layers of rock beneath the surface helps us to understand the history of planet Earth (Figure 1.12). 	earth science is a branch of geology	false
Geology is the study of the solid Earth. Geologists study how rocks and minerals form. The way mountains rise up is part of geology. The way mountains erode away is another part. Geologists also study fossils and Earths history. There are many other branches of geology. There is so much to know about our home planet that most geologists become specialists in one area. For example, a mineralogist studies minerals, as seen in (Figure 1.11). Some volcanologists brave molten lava to study volcanoes. Seismologists monitor earthquakes worldwide to help protect people and property from harm (Figure 1.11). Paleontologists are interested in fossils and how ancient organisms lived. Scientists who compare the geology of other planets to Earth are planetary geologists. Some geologists study the Moon. Others look for petroleum. Still others specialize in studying soil. Some geologists can tell how old rocks are and determine how different rock layers formed. There is probably an expert in almost anything you can think of related to Earth! Geologists might study rivers and lakes, the underground water found between soil and rock particles, or even water that is frozen in glaciers. Earth scientists also need geographers who explore the features of Earths surface and work with cartographers, who make maps. Studying the layers of rock beneath the surface helps us to understand the history of planet Earth (Figure 1.12). 	some geologists specialize in the study of soil	true
Geology is the study of the solid Earth. Geologists study how rocks and minerals form. The way mountains rise up is part of geology. The way mountains erode away is another part. Geologists also study fossils and Earths history. There are many other branches of geology. There is so much to know about our home planet that most geologists become specialists in one area. For example, a mineralogist studies minerals, as seen in (Figure 1.11). Some volcanologists brave molten lava to study volcanoes. Seismologists monitor earthquakes worldwide to help protect people and property from harm (Figure 1.11). Paleontologists are interested in fossils and how ancient organisms lived. Scientists who compare the geology of other planets to Earth are planetary geologists. Some geologists study the Moon. Others look for petroleum. Still others specialize in studying soil. Some geologists can tell how old rocks are and determine how different rock layers formed. There is probably an expert in almost anything you can think of related to Earth! Geologists might study rivers and lakes, the underground water found between soil and rock particles, or even water that is frozen in glaciers. Earth scientists also need geographers who explore the features of Earths surface and work with cartographers, who make maps. Studying the layers of rock beneath the surface helps us to understand the history of planet Earth (Figure 1.12). 	rock layers below earths surface are a record of earths history	true
Oceanography is the study of the oceans. The word oceanology might be more accurate, since ology is the study of. Graph is to write and refers to map making. But mapping the oceans is how oceanography started. More than 70% of Earths surface is covered with water. Almost all of that water is in the oceans. Scientists have visited the deepest parts of the ocean in submarines. Remote vehicles go where humans cant. Yet much of the ocean remains unexplored. Some people call the ocean the last frontier. Humans have had a big impact on the oceans. Populations of fish and other marine species have been overfished. Contaminants are polluting the waters. Global warming is melting the thick ice caps and warming the water. Warmer water expands and, along with water from the melting ice caps, causes sea levels to rise. There are many branches of oceanography. Physical oceanography is the study of water movement, like waves and ocean currents (Figure 1.13). Marine geology looks at rocks and structures in the ocean basins. Chemical oceanography studies the natural elements in ocean water. Marine biology looks at marine life. 	the science of oceanography started with mapping the oceans	true
Oceanography is the study of the oceans. The word oceanology might be more accurate, since ology is the study of. Graph is to write and refers to map making. But mapping the oceans is how oceanography started. More than 70% of Earths surface is covered with water. Almost all of that water is in the oceans. Scientists have visited the deepest parts of the ocean in submarines. Remote vehicles go where humans cant. Yet much of the ocean remains unexplored. Some people call the ocean the last frontier. Humans have had a big impact on the oceans. Populations of fish and other marine species have been overfished. Contaminants are polluting the waters. Global warming is melting the thick ice caps and warming the water. Warmer water expands and, along with water from the melting ice caps, causes sea levels to rise. There are many branches of oceanography. Physical oceanography is the study of water movement, like waves and ocean currents (Figure 1.13). Marine geology looks at rocks and structures in the ocean basins. Chemical oceanography studies the natural elements in ocean water. Marine biology looks at marine life. 	scientists have not yet visited the deepest parts of the ocean	false
Geology is the study of the solid Earth. Geologists study how rocks and minerals form. The way mountains rise up is part of geology. The way mountains erode away is another part. Geologists also study fossils and Earths history. There are many other branches of geology. There is so much to know about our home planet that most geologists become specialists in one area. For example, a mineralogist studies minerals, as seen in (Figure 1.11). Some volcanologists brave molten lava to study volcanoes. Seismologists monitor earthquakes worldwide to help protect people and property from harm (Figure 1.11). Paleontologists are interested in fossils and how ancient organisms lived. Scientists who compare the geology of other planets to Earth are planetary geologists. Some geologists study the Moon. Others look for petroleum. Still others specialize in studying soil. Some geologists can tell how old rocks are and determine how different rock layers formed. There is probably an expert in almost anything you can think of related to Earth! Geologists might study rivers and lakes, the underground water found between soil and rock particles, or even water that is frozen in glaciers. Earth scientists also need geographers who explore the features of Earths surface and work with cartographers, who make maps. Studying the layers of rock beneath the surface helps us to understand the history of planet Earth (Figure 1.12). 	most of earths water is in rivers and lakes	false
Environmental scientists study the ways that humans affect the planet we live on. We hope to find better ways of living that can also help the environment. Ecologists study lifeforms and the environments they live in (Figure 1.16). They try to predict the chain reactions that could occur when one part of the ecosystem is disrupted. 	humans have had relatively little impact on the oceans	false
Oceanography is the study of the oceans. The word oceanology might be more accurate, since ology is the study of. Graph is to write and refers to map making. But mapping the oceans is how oceanography started. More than 70% of Earths surface is covered with water. Almost all of that water is in the oceans. Scientists have visited the deepest parts of the ocean in submarines. Remote vehicles go where humans cant. Yet much of the ocean remains unexplored. Some people call the ocean the last frontier. Humans have had a big impact on the oceans. Populations of fish and other marine species have been overfished. Contaminants are polluting the waters. Global warming is melting the thick ice caps and warming the water. Warmer water expands and, along with water from the melting ice caps, causes sea levels to rise. There are many branches of oceanography. Physical oceanography is the study of water movement, like waves and ocean currents (Figure 1.13). Marine geology looks at rocks and structures in the ocean basins. Chemical oceanography studies the natural elements in ocean water. Marine biology looks at marine life. 	there are several branches of oceanography	true
Meteorologists dont study meteors they study the atmosphere! The word meteor refers to things in the air. Meteorology includes the study of weather patterns, clouds, hurricanes, and tornadoes. Meteorology is very important. Using radars and satellites, meteorologists work to predict, or forecast, the weather (Figure 1.14). The atmosphere is a thin layer of gas that surrounds Earth. Climatologists study the atmosphere. These scientists work to understand the climate as it is now. They also study how climate will change in response to global warming. The atmosphere contains small amounts of carbon dioxide. Climatologists have found that humans are putting a lot of extra carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. This is mostly from burning fossil fuels. The extra carbon dioxide traps heat from the Sun. Trapped heat causes the atmosphere to heat up. We call this global warming (Figure 1.15). 	meteorologists study meteors	false
Meteorologists dont study meteors they study the atmosphere! The word meteor refers to things in the air. Meteorology includes the study of weather patterns, clouds, hurricanes, and tornadoes. Meteorology is very important. Using radars and satellites, meteorologists work to predict, or forecast, the weather (Figure 1.14). The atmosphere is a thin layer of gas that surrounds Earth. Climatologists study the atmosphere. These scientists work to understand the climate as it is now. They also study how climate will change in response to global warming. The atmosphere contains small amounts of carbon dioxide. Climatologists have found that humans are putting a lot of extra carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. This is mostly from burning fossil fuels. The extra carbon dioxide traps heat from the Sun. Trapped heat causes the atmosphere to heat up. We call this global warming (Figure 1.15). 	the burning of fossil fuels contributes to global warming	true
Water that flows over Earths surface includes runoff, streams, and rivers. All these types of flowing water can cause erosion and deposition. 	flowing water can cause erosion by dissolving minerals in rocks	true
Faster-moving water has more energy. Therefore, it can carry larger particles. It can carry more particles. What causes water to move faster? The slope of the land over which the water flows is one factor. The steeper the slope, the faster the water flows. Another factor is the amount of water thats in the stream. Streams with a lot of water flow faster than streams that are nearly dry. 	more slowly flowing water can carry larger sediments	false
The size of particles determines how they are carried by flowing water. This is illustrated in Figure 10.2. Minerals that dissolve in water form salts. The salts are carried in solution. They are mixed thoroughly with the water. Small particles, such as clay and silt, are carried in suspension. They are mixed throughout the water. These particles are not dissolved in the water. Somewhat bigger particles, such as sand, are moved by saltation. The particles move in little jumps near the stream bottom. They are nudged along by water and other particles. The biggest particles, including gravel and pebbles, are moved by traction. In this process, the particles roll or drag along the bottom of the water. 	the size of sediments determines how they are carried by flowing water	true
The size of particles determines how they are carried by flowing water. This is illustrated in Figure 10.2. Minerals that dissolve in water form salts. The salts are carried in solution. They are mixed thoroughly with the water. Small particles, such as clay and silt, are carried in suspension. They are mixed throughout the water. These particles are not dissolved in the water. Somewhat bigger particles, such as sand, are moved by saltation. The particles move in little jumps near the stream bottom. They are nudged along by water and other particles. The biggest particles, including gravel and pebbles, are moved by traction. In this process, the particles roll or drag along the bottom of the water. 	clay and silt are carried in flowing water by suspension	true
Water that flows over Earths surface includes runoff, streams, and rivers. All these types of flowing water can cause erosion and deposition. 	runoff is only a minor cause of soil erosion	false
Water that flows over Earths surface includes runoff, streams, and rivers. All these types of flowing water can cause erosion and deposition. 	rapidly flowing mountain streams cause little deposition	true
Rivers flowing over gentle slopes erode the sides of their channels more than the bottom. Large curves, called meanders, form because of erosion and deposition by the moving water. The curves are called meanders because they slowly wander over the land. You can see how this happens in Figure 10.6. As meanders erode from side to side, they create a floodplain. This is a broad, flat area on both sides of a river. Eventually, a meander may become cut off from the rest of the river. This forms an oxbow lake, like the one in Figure 10.6. 	slowly flowing rivers erode their channels more at the bottom than at the sides	false
A flood occurs when a river overflows it banks. This might happen because of heavy rains. Floodplains As the water spreads out over the land, it slows down and drops its sediment. If a river floods often, the floodplain develops a thick layer of rich soil because of all the deposits. Thats why floodplains are usually good places for growing plants. For example, the Nile River in Egypt provides both water and thick sediments for raising crops in the middle of a sandy desert. Natural Levees A flooding river often forms natural levees along its banks. A levee is a raised strip of sediments deposited close to the waters edge. You can see how levees form in Figure 10.8. Levees occur because floodwaters deposit their biggest sediments first when they overflow the rivers banks. 	floodplains are poor places for growing crops	false
When a stream or river slows down, it starts dropping its sediments. Larger sediments are dropped in steep areas, but smaller sediments can still be carried. Smaller sediments are dropped as the slope becomes less steep. Alluvial Fans In arid regions, a mountain stream may flow onto flatter land. The stream comes to a stop rapidly. The deposits form an alluvial fan, like the one in Figure 10.7. Deltas Deposition also occurs when a stream or river empties into a large body of still water. In this case, a delta forms. A delta is shaped like a triangle. It spreads out into the body of water. An example is shown in Figure 10.7. 	a levee forms from the largest sediments a river carries	true
As erosion by groundwater continues, the ceiling of a cave may collapse. The rock and soil above it sink into the ground. This forms a sinkhole on the surface. You can see an example of a sinkhole in Figure 10.10. Some sinkholes are big enough to swallow vehicles and buildings. 	sinkholes are caused by groundwater erosion	true
Rivers flowing over gentle slopes erode the sides of their channels more than the bottom. Large curves, called meanders, form because of erosion and deposition by the moving water. The curves are called meanders because they slowly wander over the land. You can see how this happens in Figure 10.6. As meanders erode from side to side, they create a floodplain. This is a broad, flat area on both sides of a river. Eventually, a meander may become cut off from the rest of the river. This forms an oxbow lake, like the one in Figure 10.6. 	broad flat area on both sides of a river where it floods its banks	1.d
Some water soaks into the ground. It travels down through tiny holes in soil. It seeps through cracks in rock. The water moves slowly, pulled deeper and deeper by gravity. Underground water can also erode and deposit material. 	underground hole or cavern eroded by groundwater	2.e
Flowing water slows down when it reaches flatter land or flows into a body of still water. What do you think happens then? The water starts dropping the particles it was carrying. As the water slows, it drops the largest particles first. The smallest particles settle out last. 	deposit that forms when a mountain stream flows suddenly onto flatter land	3.a
A flood occurs when a river overflows it banks. This might happen because of heavy rains. Floodplains As the water spreads out over the land, it slows down and drops its sediment. If a river floods often, the floodplain develops a thick layer of rich soil because of all the deposits. Thats why floodplains are usually good places for growing plants. For example, the Nile River in Egypt provides both water and thick sediments for raising crops in the middle of a sandy desert. Natural Levees A flooding river often forms natural levees along its banks. A levee is a raised strip of sediments deposited close to the waters edge. You can see how levees form in Figure 10.8. Levees occur because floodwaters deposit their biggest sediments first when they overflow the rivers banks. 	raised strip of sediments deposited along the bank of a river	4.c
As erosion by groundwater continues, the ceiling of a cave may collapse. The rock and soil above it sink into the ground. This forms a sinkhole on the surface. You can see an example of a sinkhole in Figure 10.10. Some sinkholes are big enough to swallow vehicles and buildings. 	hole on the surface of the ground that forms when a cave collapses	5. f
When a stream or river slows down, it starts dropping its sediments. Larger sediments are dropped in steep areas, but smaller sediments can still be carried. Smaller sediments are dropped as the slope becomes less steep. Alluvial Fans In arid regions, a mountain stream may flow onto flatter land. The stream comes to a stop rapidly. The deposits form an alluvial fan, like the one in Figure 10.7. Deltas Deposition also occurs when a stream or river empties into a large body of still water. In this case, a delta forms. A delta is shaped like a triangle. It spreads out into the body of water. An example is shown in Figure 10.7. 	triangular deposit that forms when a river empties into a body of still water	6. b
Rivers flowing over gentle slopes erode the sides of their channels more than the bottom. Large curves, called meanders, form because of erosion and deposition by the moving water. The curves are called meanders because they slowly wander over the land. You can see how this happens in Figure 10.6. As meanders erode from side to side, they create a floodplain. This is a broad, flat area on both sides of a river. Eventually, a meander may become cut off from the rest of the river. This forms an oxbow lake, like the one in Figure 10.6. 	body of water that forms when a meander is cut off from the rest of the river	7. g
Deposits from longshore drift may form a spit. A spit is a ridge of sand that extends away from the shore. The end of the spit may hook around toward the quieter waters close to shore. You can see a spit in Figure 10.16. Waves may also deposit sediments to form sandbars and barrier islands. You can see examples of these landforms in Figure 10.17. 	landform that results when a sandbar builds up enough to rise above the waters surface	1.b
Barrier islands provide natural protection to shorelines. Storm waves strike the barrier island before they reach the shore. People also build artificial barriers, called breakwaters. Breakwaters also protect the shoreline from incoming waves. You can see an example of a breakwater in Figure 10.18. It runs parallel to the coast like a barrier island. 	artificial barrier parallel to a shore that reduces beach erosion	2.g
Erosion by waves can create unique landforms (Figure 10.12). Wave-cut cliffs form when waves erode a rocky shoreline. They create a vertical wall of exposed rock layers. Sea arches form when waves erode both sides of a cliff. They create a hole in the cliff. Sea stacks form when waves erode the top of a sea arch. This leaves behind pillars of rock. 	landform that results when waves create a hole in a wavecut cliff	3.f
Longshore drift can erode the sediment from a beach. To keep this from happening, people may build a series of groins. A groin is wall of rocks or concrete that juts out into the ocean perpendicular to the shore. It stops waves from moving right along the beach. This stops the sand on the upcurrent side and reduces beach erosion. You can see how groins work in Figure 10.19. 	artificial barrier perpendicular to the shore that reduces erosion by longshore drift	4.c
Erosion by waves can create unique landforms (Figure 10.12). Wave-cut cliffs form when waves erode a rocky shoreline. They create a vertical wall of exposed rock layers. Sea arches form when waves erode both sides of a cliff. They create a hole in the cliff. Sea stacks form when waves erode the top of a sea arch. This leaves behind pillars of rock. 	landform that results when waves erode the top of a sea arch	5.d
Deposits from longshore drift may form a spit. A spit is a ridge of sand that extends away from the shore. The end of the spit may hook around toward the quieter waters close to shore. You can see a spit in Figure 10.16. Waves may also deposit sediments to form sandbars and barrier islands. You can see examples of these landforms in Figure 10.17. 	underwater ridge of sand running parallel to shore that is deposited by waves	6.e
Deposits from longshore drift may form a spit. A spit is a ridge of sand that extends away from the shore. The end of the spit may hook around toward the quieter waters close to shore. You can see a spit in Figure 10.16. Waves may also deposit sediments to form sandbars and barrier islands. You can see examples of these landforms in Figure 10.17. 	ridge of sand extending out from shore that is caused by longshore drift	7.a
Runoff, streams, and rivers carry sediment to the oceans. The sediment in ocean water acts like sandpaper. Over time, they erode the shore. The bigger the waves are and the more sediment they carry, the more erosion they cause. 	bigger waves can carry more sediment	true
Eventually, the sediment in ocean water is deposited. Deposition occurs where waves and other ocean motions slow. The smallest particles, such as silt and clay, are deposited away from shore. This is where water is calmer. Larger particles are deposited on the beach. This is where waves and other motions are strongest. 	the smallest sediments in ocean water are deposited on the shore	false
Most waves strike the shore at an angle. This causes longshore drift. Longshore drift moves sediment along the shore. Sediment is moved up the beach by an incoming wave. The wave approaches at an angle to the shore. Water then moves straight offshore. The sediment moves straight down the beach with it. The sediment is again picked up by a wave that is coming in at an angle. This motion is show in Figure 10.15 and at the link below. 	most waves strike the shore at an angle rather than straight on	true
Deposits from longshore drift may form a spit. A spit is a ridge of sand that extends away from the shore. The end of the spit may hook around toward the quieter waters close to shore. You can see a spit in Figure 10.16. Waves may also deposit sediments to form sandbars and barrier islands. You can see examples of these landforms in Figure 10.17. 	longshore drift carries sediments far inland	false
Deposits from longshore drift may form a spit. A spit is a ridge of sand that extends away from the shore. The end of the spit may hook around toward the quieter waters close to shore. You can see a spit in Figure 10.16. Waves may also deposit sediments to form sandbars and barrier islands. You can see examples of these landforms in Figure 10.17. 	groins are built to prevent the formation of sandbars	false
Runoff, streams, and rivers carry sediment to the oceans. The sediment in ocean water acts like sandpaper. Over time, they erode the shore. The bigger the waves are and the more sediment they carry, the more erosion they cause. 	sediment in ocean water scrapes rocks like sandpaper	true
Most waves strike the shore at an angle. This causes longshore drift. Longshore drift moves sediment along the shore. Sediment is moved up the beach by an incoming wave. The wave approaches at an angle to the shore. Water then moves straight offshore. The sediment moves straight down the beach with it. The sediment is again picked up by a wave that is coming in at an angle. This motion is show in Figure 10.15 and at the link below. 	longshore drift moves sand opposite to the direction of prevailing winds	false
Deposits from longshore drift may form a spit. A spit is a ridge of sand that extends away from the shore. The end of the spit may hook around toward the quieter waters close to shore. You can see a spit in Figure 10.16. Waves may also deposit sediments to form sandbars and barrier islands. You can see examples of these landforms in Figure 10.17. 	the end of a spit may hook around toward the open ocean	false
Barrier islands provide natural protection to shorelines. Storm waves strike the barrier island before they reach the shore. People also build artificial barriers, called breakwaters. Breakwaters also protect the shoreline from incoming waves. You can see an example of a breakwater in Figure 10.18. It runs parallel to the coast like a barrier island. 	a barrier island is generally small and round in shape	false
Longshore drift can erode the sediment from a beach. To keep this from happening, people may build a series of groins. A groin is wall of rocks or concrete that juts out into the ocean perpendicular to the shore. It stops waves from moving right along the beach. This stops the sand on the upcurrent side and reduces beach erosion. You can see how groins work in Figure 10.19. 	sand collects on both sides of a groin	false
Glaciers form when more snow falls than melts each year. Over many years, layer upon layer of snow compacts and turns to ice. There are two different types of glaciers: continental glaciers and valley glaciers. Each type forms some unique features through erosion and deposition. An example of each type is pictured in Figure 10.27. A continental glacier is spread out over a huge area. It may cover most of a continent. Today, continental glaciers cover most of Greenland and Antarctica. In the past, they were much more extensive. A valley glacier is long and narrow. Valley glaciers form in mountains and flow downhill through mountain river valleys. 	glaciers presently cover about 40 percent of earths surface	false
Glaciers form when more snow falls than melts each year. Over many years, layer upon layer of snow compacts and turns to ice. There are two different types of glaciers: continental glaciers and valley glaciers. Each type forms some unique features through erosion and deposition. An example of each type is pictured in Figure 10.27. A continental glacier is spread out over a huge area. It may cover most of a continent. Today, continental glaciers cover most of Greenland and Antarctica. In the past, they were much more extensive. A valley glacier is long and narrow. Valley glaciers form in mountains and flow downhill through mountain river valleys. 	continental glaciers are long and narrow	false
Glaciers form when more snow falls than melts each year. Over many years, layer upon layer of snow compacts and turns to ice. There are two different types of glaciers: continental glaciers and valley glaciers. Each type forms some unique features through erosion and deposition. An example of each type is pictured in Figure 10.27. A continental glacier is spread out over a huge area. It may cover most of a continent. Today, continental glaciers cover most of Greenland and Antarctica. In the past, they were much more extensive. A valley glacier is long and narrow. Valley glaciers form in mountains and flow downhill through mountain river valleys. 	valley glaciers flow downhill through river valleys	true
Glaciers form when more snow falls than melts each year. Over many years, layer upon layer of snow compacts and turns to ice. There are two different types of glaciers: continental glaciers and valley glaciers. Each type forms some unique features through erosion and deposition. An example of each type is pictured in Figure 10.27. A continental glacier is spread out over a huge area. It may cover most of a continent. Today, continental glaciers cover most of Greenland and Antarctica. In the past, they were much more extensive. A valley glacier is long and narrow. Valley glaciers form in mountains and flow downhill through mountain river valleys. 	continental glaciers form cirques and horns	false
Like flowing water, flowing ice erodes the land and deposits the material elsewhere. Glaciers cause erosion in two main ways: plucking and abrasion. Plucking is the process by which rocks and other sediments are picked up by a glacier. They freeze to the bottom of the glacier and are carried away by the flowing ice. Abrasion is the process in which a glacier scrapes underlying rock. The sediments and rocks frozen in the ice at the bottom and sides of a glacier act like sandpaper. They wear away rock. They may also leave scratches and grooves that show the direction the glacier moved. 	a glacier picks up sediments when they freeze to ice at the bottom of the glacier	true
Like flowing water, flowing ice erodes the land and deposits the material elsewhere. Glaciers cause erosion in two main ways: plucking and abrasion. Plucking is the process by which rocks and other sediments are picked up by a glacier. They freeze to the bottom of the glacier and are carried away by the flowing ice. Abrasion is the process in which a glacier scrapes underlying rock. The sediments and rocks frozen in the ice at the bottom and sides of a glacier act like sandpaper. They wear away rock. They may also leave scratches and grooves that show the direction the glacier moved. 	the narrow end of a drumlin points in the direction that the glacier moved	true
Like flowing water, flowing ice erodes the land and deposits the material elsewhere. Glaciers cause erosion in two main ways: plucking and abrasion. Plucking is the process by which rocks and other sediments are picked up by a glacier. They freeze to the bottom of the glacier and are carried away by the flowing ice. Abrasion is the process in which a glacier scrapes underlying rock. The sediments and rocks frozen in the ice at the bottom and sides of a glacier act like sandpaper. They wear away rock. They may also leave scratches and grooves that show the direction the glacier moved. 	all glaciers move because of gravity	true
Like flowing water, flowing ice erodes the land and deposits the material elsewhere. Glaciers cause erosion in two main ways: plucking and abrasion. Plucking is the process by which rocks and other sediments are picked up by a glacier. They freeze to the bottom of the glacier and are carried away by the flowing ice. Abrasion is the process in which a glacier scrapes underlying rock. The sediments and rocks frozen in the ice at the bottom and sides of a glacier act like sandpaper. They wear away rock. They may also leave scratches and grooves that show the direction the glacier moved. 	the main way glaciers cause erosion is by ice wedging	false
Like flowing water, flowing ice erodes the land and deposits the material elsewhere. Glaciers cause erosion in two main ways: plucking and abrasion. Plucking is the process by which rocks and other sediments are picked up by a glacier. They freeze to the bottom of the glacier and are carried away by the flowing ice. Abrasion is the process in which a glacier scrapes underlying rock. The sediments and rocks frozen in the ice at the bottom and sides of a glacier act like sandpaper. They wear away rock. They may also leave scratches and grooves that show the direction the glacier moved. 	glaciers are getting smaller because of global warming	true
Valley glaciers form several unique features through erosion. You can see some of them in Figure 10.28. As a valley glacier flows through a V-shaped river valley, it scrapes away the sides of the valley. It carves a U-shaped valley with nearly vertical walls. A line called the trimline shows the highest level the glacier reached. A cirque is a rounded hollow carved in the side of a mountain by a glacier. The highest cliff of a cirque is called the headwall. An arte is a jagged ridge that remains when cirques form on opposite sides of a mountain. A low spot in an arte is called a col. A horn is a sharp peak that is left behind when glacial cirques are on at least three sides of a mountain. 	the valley carved by a mountain glacier has gently sloping walls	false
Valley glaciers form several unique features through erosion. You can see some of them in Figure 10.28. As a valley glacier flows through a V-shaped river valley, it scrapes away the sides of the valley. It carves a U-shaped valley with nearly vertical walls. A line called the trimline shows the highest level the glacier reached. A cirque is a rounded hollow carved in the side of a mountain by a glacier. The highest cliff of a cirque is called the headwall. An arte is a jagged ridge that remains when cirques form on opposite sides of a mountain. A low spot in an arte is called a col. A horn is a sharp peak that is left behind when glacial cirques are on at least three sides of a mountain. 	rounded hollow carved in the side of a mountain by a glacier	1. d
Glaciers form when more snow falls than melts each year. Over many years, layer upon layer of snow compacts and turns to ice. There are two different types of glaciers: continental glaciers and valley glaciers. Each type forms some unique features through erosion and deposition. An example of each type is pictured in Figure 10.27. A continental glacier is spread out over a huge area. It may cover most of a continent. Today, continental glaciers cover most of Greenland and Antarctica. In the past, they were much more extensive. A valley glacier is long and narrow. Valley glaciers form in mountains and flow downhill through mountain river valleys. 	type of glacier that is spread out over a large area	2.a
Glaciers deposit their sediment when they melt. They drop and leave behind whatever was once frozen in their ice. Its usually a mixture of particles and rocks of all sizes, called glacial till. Water from the melting ice may form lakes or other water features. Figure 10.29 shows some of the landforms glaciers deposit when they melt. Moraine is sediment deposited by a glacier. A ground moraine is a thick layer of sediments left behind by a retreating glacier. An end moraine is a low ridge of sediments deposited at the end of the glacier. It marks the greatest distance the glacier advanced. A drumlin is a long, low hill of sediments deposited by a glacier. Drumlins often occur in groups called drumlin fields. The narrow end of each drumlin points in the direction the glacier was moving when it dropped the sediments. An esker is a winding ridge of sand deposited by a stream of meltwater. Such streams flow underneath a retreating glacier. A kettle lake occurs where a chunk of ice was left behind in the sediments of a retreating glacier. When the ice melted, it left a depression. The meltwater filled it to form a lake. 	long low hill of sediments deposited by a glacier	3.g
Glaciers form when more snow falls than melts each year. Over many years, layer upon layer of snow compacts and turns to ice. There are two different types of glaciers: continental glaciers and valley glaciers. Each type forms some unique features through erosion and deposition. An example of each type is pictured in Figure 10.27. A continental glacier is spread out over a huge area. It may cover most of a continent. Today, continental glaciers cover most of Greenland and Antarctica. In the past, they were much more extensive. A valley glacier is long and narrow. Valley glaciers form in mountains and flow downhill through mountain river valleys. 	type of glacier that forms in mountains	4..e
Glaciers deposit their sediment when they melt. They drop and leave behind whatever was once frozen in their ice. Its usually a mixture of particles and rocks of all sizes, called glacial till. Water from the melting ice may form lakes or other water features. Figure 10.29 shows some of the landforms glaciers deposit when they melt. Moraine is sediment deposited by a glacier. A ground moraine is a thick layer of sediments left behind by a retreating glacier. An end moraine is a low ridge of sediments deposited at the end of the glacier. It marks the greatest distance the glacier advanced. A drumlin is a long, low hill of sediments deposited by a glacier. Drumlins often occur in groups called drumlin fields. The narrow end of each drumlin points in the direction the glacier was moving when it dropped the sediments. An esker is a winding ridge of sand deposited by a stream of meltwater. Such streams flow underneath a retreating glacier. A kettle lake occurs where a chunk of ice was left behind in the sediments of a retreating glacier. When the ice melted, it left a depression. The meltwater filled it to form a lake. 	winding ridge of sand deposited by a stream of meltwater	5.c
Valley glaciers form several unique features through erosion. You can see some of them in Figure 10.28. As a valley glacier flows through a V-shaped river valley, it scrapes away the sides of the valley. It carves a U-shaped valley with nearly vertical walls. A line called the trimline shows the highest level the glacier reached. A cirque is a rounded hollow carved in the side of a mountain by a glacier. The highest cliff of a cirque is called the headwall. An arte is a jagged ridge that remains when cirques form on opposite sides of a mountain. A low spot in an arte is called a col. A horn is a sharp peak that is left behind when glacial cirques are on at least three sides of a mountain. 	jagged ridge that remains when two cirques form on opposite sides of a mountain	6.b
Valley glaciers form several unique features through erosion. You can see some of them in Figure 10.28. As a valley glacier flows through a V-shaped river valley, it scrapes away the sides of the valley. It carves a U-shaped valley with nearly vertical walls. A line called the trimline shows the highest level the glacier reached. A cirque is a rounded hollow carved in the side of a mountain by a glacier. The highest cliff of a cirque is called the headwall. An arte is a jagged ridge that remains when cirques form on opposite sides of a mountain. A low spot in an arte is called a col. A horn is a sharp peak that is left behind when glacial cirques are on at least three sides of a mountain. 	sharp peak that is left behind when glaciers erode all sides of a mountain	7.f
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	preserved traces can include burrows	true
Of all the organisms that ever lived, only a tiny number became fossils. Still, scientists learn a lot from fossils. Fossils are our best clues about the history of life on Earth. 	scientists have discovered fossil footprints	true
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	complete preservation occurs only when remains are preserved in rock	false
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	in the past fossils inspired legends of monsters	true
Its very unlikely that any given organism will become a fossil. The remains of many organisms are consumed. Remains also may be broken down by other living things or by the elements. Hard parts, such as bones, are much more likely to become fossils. But even they rarely last long enough to become fossils. Organisms without hard parts are the least likely to be fossilized. Fossils of soft organisms, from bacteria to jellyfish, are very rare. 	it is very likely that any given organism will become a fossil	false
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	fossils in older rocks are more similar to animals that live today than fossils in younger rocks	false
Fossils give clues about major geological events. Fossils can also give clues about past climates. Fossils of ocean animals are found at the top of Mt. Everest. Mt. Everest is the highest mountain on Earth. These fossils show that the area was once at the bottom of a sea. The seabed was later uplifted to form the Himalaya mountain range. An example is shown in the Figure 11.4. Fossils of plants are found in Antarctica. Currently, Antarctica is almost completely covered with ice. The fossil plants show that Antarctica once had a much warmer climate. 	fossils of ocean animals have been found at the top of mt everest	true
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	fossils form when remains are replaced by minerals	true
Fossils give clues about major geological events. Fossils can also give clues about past climates. Fossils of ocean animals are found at the top of Mt. Everest. Mt. Everest is the highest mountain on Earth. These fossils show that the area was once at the bottom of a sea. The seabed was later uplifted to form the Himalaya mountain range. An example is shown in the Figure 11.4. Fossils of plants are found in Antarctica. Currently, Antarctica is almost completely covered with ice. The fossil plants show that Antarctica once had a much warmer climate. 	fossils show that antarctica once had a much warmer climate	true
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	index fossils are the first fossils ever discovered of an extinct species	false
Of all the organisms that ever lived, only a tiny number became fossils. Still, scientists learn a lot from fossils. Fossils are our best clues about the history of life on Earth. 	complete preservation is valuable because scientists can study the organisms dna	true
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	there are no plants in antarctica so there are no plant fossils there	false
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	teeth are more likely than feathers to be preserved as fossils	true
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	people first started discovering fossils about 150 years ago	false
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	all fossils form when remains of dead organisms are covered with sediments	false
Most fossils form when a dead organism is buried in sediment. Layers of sediment slowly build up. The sediment is buried and turns into sedimentary rock. The remains inside the rock also turn to rock. The remains are replaced by minerals. The remains literally turn to stone. Fossilization is illustrated in Figure 11.2. 	dark stain in rock left by the remains of an organism	1. g
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	preserved tracks or other evidence of an organism that lived in the past	2. e
Fossils are used to determine the ages of rock layers. Index fossils are the most useful for this. Index fossils are of organisms that lived over a wide area. They lived for a fairly short period of time. An index fossil allows a scientist to determine the age of the rock it is in. Trilobite fossils, as shown in Figure 11.5, are common index fossils. Trilobites were widespread marine animals. They lived between 500 and 600 million years ago. Rock layers containing trilobite fossils must be that age. Different species of trilobite fossils can be used to narrow the age even more. 	type of fossil that can be used to determine the age of rock layers	3. c
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils	4.f
Fossils may form in other ways. With complete preservation, the organism doesnt change much. As seen below, tree sap may cover an organism and then turn into amber. The original organism is preserved so that scientists might be able to study its DNA. Organisms can also be completely preserved in tar or ice. Molds and casts are another way organisms can be fossilized. A mold is an imprint of an organism left in rock. The organisms remains break down completely. Rock that fills in the mold resembles the original remains. The fossil that forms in the mold is called a cast. Molds and casts usually form in sedimentary rock. With compression, an organisms remains are put under great pressure inside rock layers. This leaves behind a dark stain in the rock. You can read about them in Figure 11.3. 	type of fossil that forms in a mold	5.d
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization. Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks. 	any preserved remains or traces of an organism that lived in the past	6.a
Most fossils form when a dead organism is buried in sediment. Layers of sediment slowly build up. The sediment is buried and turns into sedimentary rock. The remains inside the rock also turn to rock. The remains are replaced by minerals. The remains literally turn to stone. Fossilization is illustrated in Figure 11.2. 	imprint of an organism left in rock	7.b
The geologic time scale may include illustrations of how life on Earth has changed. Major events on Earth may also be shown. These include the formation of the major mountains or the extinction of the dinosaurs. Figure 11.14 is a different kind of the geologic time scale. It shows how Earths environment and life forms have changed. 	earths geologic processes have changed over time	false
The geologic time scale may include illustrations of how life on Earth has changed. Major events on Earth may also be shown. These include the formation of the major mountains or the extinction of the dinosaurs. Figure 11.14 is a different kind of the geologic time scale. It shows how Earths environment and life forms have changed. 	extinction occurs when a species completely dies out	true
Sediments were deposited in ancient seas in horizontal, or flat, layers. If sedimentary rock layers are tilted, they must have moved after they were deposited. 	layers of sedimentary rock are called strata	true
When rock layers are in the same place, its easy to give them relative ages. But what if rock layers are far apart? What if they are on different continents? What evidence is used to match rock layers in different places? 	the relative age of a rock is its approximate age in years	false
Rock layers extend laterally, or out to the sides. They may cover very broad areas, especially if they formed at the bottom of ancient seas. Erosion may have worn away some of the rock, but layers on either side of eroded areas will still match up. Look at the Grand Canyon in Figure 11.8. Its a good example of lateral continuity. You can clearly see the same rock layers on opposite sides of the canyon. The matching rock layers were deposited at the same time, so they are the same age. 	rock layers on opposite sides of the grand canyon show lateral continuity	true
Index fossils are commonly used to match rock layers in different places. You can see how this works in Figure 	key beds are rock layers that have unconformities	false
Index fossils are commonly used to match rock layers in different places. You can see how this works in Figure 	more than one type of index fossil provides stronger evidence that rock layers are the same age	true
Divisions in Earth history are recorded on the geologic time scale. For example, the Cretaceous ended when the dinosaurs went extinct. European geologists were the first to put together the geologic time scale. So, many of the names of the time periods are from places in Europe. The Jurassic Period is named for the Jura Mountains in France and Switzerland, for example. 	the cretaceous period ended when the first dinosaurs appeared	false
The largest blocks of time on the geologic time scale are called eons. Eons are split into eras. Each era is divided into periods. Periods may be further divided into epochs. Geologists may just use early or late. An example is late Jurassic, or early Cretaceous. Figure 11.13 shows you what the geologic time scale looks like. 	the earliest geologic time scale showed how many years ago each era began	false
We now live in the Phanerozoic Eon, the Cenozoic Era, the Quaternary Period, and the Holocene Epoch. Phanero- zoic means visible life. During this eon, rocks contain visible fossils. Before the Phanerozoic, life was microscopic. The Cenozoic Era means new life. It encompasses the most recent forms of life on Earth. The Cenozoic is sometimes called the Age of Mammals. Before the Cenozoic came the Mesozoic and Paleozoic. The Mesozoic means middle life. This is the age of reptiles, when dinosaurs ruled the planet. The Paleozoic is old life. Organisms like invertebrates and fish were the most common lifeforms. 	fish were common organisms during the paleozoic era	true
Index fossils are commonly used to match rock layers in different places. You can see how this works in Figure 	fossil b is younger than fossil a but the rock layer containing fossil b is beneath the rock layer	true
To create the geologic time scale, geologists correlated rock layers. Stenos laws were used to determine the relative ages of rocks. Older rocks are at the bottom and younger rocks are at the top. The early geologic time scale could only show the order of events. The discovery of radioactivity in the late 1800s changed that. Scientists could determine the exact age of some rocks in years. They assigned dates to the time scale divisions. For example, the Jurassic began about 200 million years ago. It lasted for about 55 million years. 	to help decipher the geologic history of a region create a geologic time scale using the rock units you	false
Earth formed 4.5 billion years ago. Geologists divide this time span into smaller periods. Many of the divisions mark major events in life history. 	james hutton thought earth was old because he saw how slowly geological processes work now	true
Rock layers may have another rock cutting across them, like the igneous rock in Figure 11.9. Which rock is older? To determine this, we use the law of cross-cutting relationships. The cut rock layers are older than the rock that cuts across them. 	crosscutting relationships help geologists to determine the older and younger of two rock units	true
When rock layers are in the same place, its easy to give them relative ages. But what if rock layers are far apart? What if they are on different continents? What evidence is used to match rock layers in different places? 	in the process of relative dating scientists determine the exact age of a fossil or rock	false
Superposition refers to the position of rock layers and their relative ages. Relative age means age in comparison with other rocks, either younger or older. The relative ages of rocks are important for understanding Earths history. New rock layers are always deposited on top of existing rock layers. Therefore, deeper layers must be older than layers closer to the surface. This is the law of superposition. You can see an example in Figure 11.7. 	whether a rock is older or younger than other rocks	1.c
Sediments were deposited in ancient seas in horizontal, or flat, layers. If sedimentary rock layers are tilted, they must have moved after they were deposited. 	law stating that rock layers are deposited in horizontal layers	2.e
Superposition refers to the position of rock layers and their relative ages. Relative age means age in comparison with other rocks, either younger or older. The relative ages of rocks are important for understanding Earths history. New rock layers are always deposited on top of existing rock layers. Therefore, deeper layers must be older than layers closer to the surface. This is the law of superposition. You can see an example in Figure 11.7. 	law stating that rock layers closer to the surface are younger than deeper rock layers	3.b
Rock layers may have another rock cutting across them, like the igneous rock in Figure 11.9. Which rock is older? To determine this, we use the law of cross-cutting relationships. The cut rock layers are older than the rock that cuts across them. 	law stating that rock layers are older than any rocks that cut across them	4.f
Index fossils are commonly used to match rock layers in different places. You can see how this works in Figure 	gap in a sequence of rock layers	5.g
Index fossils are commonly used to match rock layers in different places. You can see how this works in Figure 	law stating that matching nearby rock layers are the same age	6.d
Index fossils are commonly used to match rock layers in different places. You can see how this works in Figure 	study of rock layers	7.a
Radioactive decay is the breakdown of unstable elements into stable elements. To understand this process, recall that the atoms of all elements contain the particles protons, neutrons, and electrons. 	the number of protons in atoms of the same element may vary	false
An element is defined by the number of protons it contains. All atoms of a given element contain the same number of protons. The number of neutrons in an element may vary. Atoms of an element with different numbers of neutrons are called isotopes. Consider carbon as an example. Two isotopes of carbon are shown in Figure 11.15. Compare their protons and neutrons. Both contain 6 protons. But carbon-12 has 6 neutrons and carbon-14 has 8 neutrons. Almost all carbon atoms are carbon-12. This is a stable isotope of carbon. Only a tiny percentage of carbon atoms are carbon-14. Carbon-14 is unstable. Figure 11.16 shows carbon dioxide, which forms in the atmosphere from carbon-14 and oxygen. Neutrons in cosmic rays strike nitrogen atoms in the atmosphere. The nitrogen forms carbon- 14. Carbon in the atmosphere combines with oxygen to form carbon dioxide. Plants take in carbon dioxide during photosynthesis. In this way, carbon-14 enters food chains. 	almost all carbon atoms are atoms of carbon14	false
Like other unstable isotopes, carbon-14 breaks down, or decays. For carbon-14 decay, each carbon-14 atom loses an alpha particle. It changes to a stable atom of nitrogen-14. This is illustrated in Figure 11.17. The decay of an unstable isotope to a stable element occurs at a constant rate. This rate is different for each isotope pair. The decay rate is measured in a unit called the half-life. The half-life is the time it takes for half of a given amount of an isotope to decay. For example, the half-life of carbon-14 is 5730 years. Imagine that you start out with 100 grams of carbon-14. In 5730 years, half of it decays. This leaves 50 grams of carbon-14. Over the next 5730 years, half of the remaining amount will decay. Now there are 25 grams of carbon-14. How many grams will there be in another 5730 years? Figure 11.18 graphs the rate of decay of carbon-14. 	when an atom of carbon14 decays it loses an electron	false
The rate of decay of unstable isotopes can be used to estimate the absolute ages of fossils and rocks. This type of dating is called radiometric dating. 	using radioactivity scientists are able to measure the relative age of some rocks	false
Radioactive decay is the breakdown of unstable elements into stable elements. To understand this process, recall that the atoms of all elements contain the particles protons, neutrons, and electrons. 	carbon14 atoms decay to carbon13 atoms	false
Radioactive decay is the breakdown of unstable elements into stable elements. To understand this process, recall that the atoms of all elements contain the particles protons, neutrons, and electrons. 	radioactive isotopes gain or lose particles to become different elements	true
Like other unstable isotopes, carbon-14 breaks down, or decays. For carbon-14 decay, each carbon-14 atom loses an alpha particle. It changes to a stable atom of nitrogen-14. This is illustrated in Figure 11.17. The decay of an unstable isotope to a stable element occurs at a constant rate. This rate is different for each isotope pair. The decay rate is measured in a unit called the half-life. The half-life is the time it takes for half of a given amount of an isotope to decay. For example, the half-life of carbon-14 is 5730 years. Imagine that you start out with 100 grams of carbon-14. In 5730 years, half of it decays. This leaves 50 grams of carbon-14. Over the next 5730 years, half of the remaining amount will decay. Now there are 25 grams of carbon-14. How many grams will there be in another 5730 years? Figure 11.18 graphs the rate of decay of carbon-14. 	the halflife of a radioactive isotope is constant	true
Like other unstable isotopes, carbon-14 breaks down, or decays. For carbon-14 decay, each carbon-14 atom loses an alpha particle. It changes to a stable atom of nitrogen-14. This is illustrated in Figure 11.17. The decay of an unstable isotope to a stable element occurs at a constant rate. This rate is different for each isotope pair. The decay rate is measured in a unit called the half-life. The half-life is the time it takes for half of a given amount of an isotope to decay. For example, the half-life of carbon-14 is 5730 years. Imagine that you start out with 100 grams of carbon-14. In 5730 years, half of it decays. This leaves 50 grams of carbon-14. Over the next 5730 years, half of the remaining amount will decay. Now there are 25 grams of carbon-14. How many grams will there be in another 5730 years? Figure 11.18 graphs the rate of decay of carbon-14. 	a living thing takes in carbon14 only while it is alive	true
The rate of decay of unstable isotopes can be used to estimate the absolute ages of fossils and rocks. This type of dating is called radiometric dating. 	no one knows earths age because no isotopes are good for substances that old	false
The rate of decay of unstable isotopes can be used to estimate the absolute ages of fossils and rocks. This type of dating is called radiometric dating. 	carbon14 dating can be used to determine the ages of rocks	false
Radioactive decay is the breakdown of unstable elements into stable elements. To understand this process, recall that the atoms of all elements contain the particles protons, neutrons, and electrons. 	carbon14 loses an alpha particle which is two protons and two electrons	false
An element is defined by the number of protons it contains. All atoms of a given element contain the same number of protons. The number of neutrons in an element may vary. Atoms of an element with different numbers of neutrons are called isotopes. Consider carbon as an example. Two isotopes of carbon are shown in Figure 11.15. Compare their protons and neutrons. Both contain 6 protons. But carbon-12 has 6 neutrons and carbon-14 has 8 neutrons. Almost all carbon atoms are carbon-12. This is a stable isotope of carbon. Only a tiny percentage of carbon atoms are carbon-14. Carbon-14 is unstable. Figure 11.16 shows carbon dioxide, which forms in the atmosphere from carbon-14 and oxygen. Neutrons in cosmic rays strike nitrogen atoms in the atmosphere. The nitrogen forms carbon- 14. Carbon in the atmosphere combines with oxygen to form carbon dioxide. Plants take in carbon dioxide during photosynthesis. In this way, carbon-14 enters food chains. 	plants take in carbon14 during photosynthesis	true
Like other unstable isotopes, carbon-14 breaks down, or decays. For carbon-14 decay, each carbon-14 atom loses an alpha particle. It changes to a stable atom of nitrogen-14. This is illustrated in Figure 11.17. The decay of an unstable isotope to a stable element occurs at a constant rate. This rate is different for each isotope pair. The decay rate is measured in a unit called the half-life. The half-life is the time it takes for half of a given amount of an isotope to decay. For example, the half-life of carbon-14 is 5730 years. Imagine that you start out with 100 grams of carbon-14. In 5730 years, half of it decays. This leaves 50 grams of carbon-14. Over the next 5730 years, half of the remaining amount will decay. Now there are 25 grams of carbon-14. How many grams will there be in another 5730 years? Figure 11.18 graphs the rate of decay of carbon-14. 	the halflife of carbon14 is 5730 years	true
The rate of decay of unstable isotopes can be used to estimate the absolute ages of fossils and rocks. This type of dating is called radiometric dating. 	all fossils can be dated with carbon14 dating	false
The isotopes in Table 11.1 are used to date igneous rocks. These isotopes have much longer half-lives than carbon- 14. Because they decay more slowly, they can be used to date much older specimens. Which of these isotopes could be used to date a rock that formed half a million years ago? Unstable Isotope Decays to At a Half-Life of (years) Potassium-40 Uranium-235 Uranium-238 Argon-40 Lead-207 Lead-206 1.3 billion 700 million 4.5 billion Dates Rocks Aged (years old) 100 thousand - 1 billion 1 million - 4.5 billion 1 million - 4.5 billion 	to date a rock that is as old as earth you could use potassium40 dating	false
The rate of decay of unstable isotopes can be used to estimate the absolute ages of fossils and rocks. This type of dating is called radiometric dating. 	using radioactive decay to estimate the age of a fossil or rock	1.g
Radioactive decay is the breakdown of unstable elements into stable elements. To understand this process, recall that the atoms of all elements contain the particles protons, neutrons, and electrons. 	radioactive element with a relatively long halflife	2.d
The rate of decay of unstable isotopes can be used to estimate the absolute ages of fossils and rocks. This type of dating is called radiometric dating. 	rate of decay of a radioactive element	3.f
Radioactive decay is the breakdown of unstable elements into stable elements. To understand this process, recall that the atoms of all elements contain the particles protons, neutrons, and electrons. 	atom of an element with a different number of neutrons	4.a
An element is defined by the number of protons it contains. All atoms of a given element contain the same number of protons. The number of neutrons in an element may vary. Atoms of an element with different numbers of neutrons are called isotopes. Consider carbon as an example. Two isotopes of carbon are shown in Figure 11.15. Compare their protons and neutrons. Both contain 6 protons. But carbon-12 has 6 neutrons and carbon-14 has 8 neutrons. Almost all carbon atoms are carbon-12. This is a stable isotope of carbon. Only a tiny percentage of carbon atoms are carbon-14. Carbon-14 is unstable. Figure 11.16 shows carbon dioxide, which forms in the atmosphere from carbon-14 and oxygen. Neutrons in cosmic rays strike nitrogen atoms in the atmosphere. The nitrogen forms carbon- 14. Carbon in the atmosphere combines with oxygen to form carbon dioxide. Plants take in carbon dioxide during photosynthesis. In this way, carbon-14 enters food chains. 	stable isotope of carbon	5.c
The best-known method of radiometric dating is carbon-14 dating. A living thing takes in carbon-14 (along with stable carbon-12). As the carbon-14 decays, it is replaced with more carbon-14. After the organism dies, it stops taking in carbon. That includes carbon-14. The carbon-14 that is in its body continues to decay. So the organism contains less and less carbon-14 as time goes on. We can estimate the amount of carbon-14 that has decayed by measuring the amount of carbon-14 to carbon-12. We know how fast carbon-14 decays. With this information, we can tell how long ago the organism died. Carbon-14 has a relatively short half-life. It decays quickly compared to some other unstable isotopes. So carbon- 14 dating is useful for specimens younger than 50,000 years old. Thats a blink of an eye in geologic time. But radiocarbon dating is very useful for more recent events. One important use of radiocarbon is early human sites. Carbon-14 dating is also limited to the remains of once-living things. To date rocks, scientists use other radioactive isotopes. 	radioactive element with a relatively short halflife	6.b
Radioactive decay is the breakdown of unstable elements into stable elements. To understand this process, recall that the atoms of all elements contain the particles protons, neutrons, and electrons. 	breakdown of unstable elements into stable elements	7.e
This model for how the Moon formed is the best fit of all of the data scientists have about the Moon. In the early solar system there was a lot of space debris. Asteroids flew around, sometimes striking the planets. An asteroid the size of Mars smashed into Earth. The huge amount of energy from the impact melted most of Earth. The asteroid melted too. Material from both Earth and the asteroid was thrown out into orbit. Over time, this material smashed together to form our Moon. The lunar surface is about 4.5 billion years old. This means that the collision happened about 70 million years after Earth formed. 	ring of icy debris just beyond neptune	1. f
Our solar system began about 5 billion years ago. The Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time. 	example of an object in the solar system	2. c
Our solar system began about 5 billion years ago. The Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time. 	water in the gaseous state	3.e
Earths first atmosphere was different from the current one. The gases came from two sources. Volcanoes spewed gases into the air. Comets carried in ices from outer space. These ices warmed and became gases. Nitrogen, carbon dioxide, hydrogen, and water vapor, or water in gas form, were in the first atmosphere (Figure 12.5). Take a look at the list of gases. Whats missing? The early atmosphere had almost no oxygen. 	gas missing from earths early atmosphere	4.g
Temperatures and pressures at the center of the cloud were extreme. It was so hot that nuclear fusion reactions began. In these reactions hydrogen fuses to make helium. Extreme amounts of energy are released. Our Sun became a star! Material in the disk surrounding the Sun collided. Small particles collided and became rocks. Rocks collided and became boulders. Eventually planets formed from the material (Figure 12.2). Dwarf plants, comets, and asteroids formed too (Figure 12.3). 	reaction in which hydrogen atoms change to helium	5.b
Our solar system began about 5 billion years ago. The Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time. 	giant cloud of gas and dust from which the solar system formed	6.d
An atmosphere is the gases that surround a planet. The early Earth had no atmosphere. Conditions were so hot that gases were not stable. 	gases that surround a planet	7.a
Our solar system began about 5 billion years ago. The Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time. 	the solar system formed from a giant mass of gas and dust	true
Our solar system began about 5 billion years ago. The Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time. 	the sun formed billions of years before other objects in the solar system	false
Our solar system began about 5 billion years ago. The Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time. 	the solar nebula formed a disk before it formed the sun	true
Earths first atmosphere was different from the current one. The gases came from two sources. Volcanoes spewed gases into the air. Comets carried in ices from outer space. These ices warmed and became gases. Nitrogen, carbon dioxide, hydrogen, and water vapor, or water in gas form, were in the first atmosphere (Figure 12.5). Take a look at the list of gases. Whats missing? The early atmosphere had almost no oxygen. 	the first atmosphere contained nitrogen carbon dioxide oxygen and hydrogen	false
Our solar system began about 5 billion years ago. The Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time. 	objects in our solar system include dwarf planets	true
Our solar system began about 5 billion years ago. The Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time. 	all of the stars in the universe formed at around the same time as our sun	false
An atmosphere is the gases that surround a planet. The early Earth had no atmosphere. Conditions were so hot that gases were not stable. 	as earth formed gravity pulled lighter materials to the center of the planet	false
Earths atmosphere slowly cooled. Once it was cooler, water vapor could condense. It changed back to its liquid form. Liquid water could fall to Earths surface as rain. Over millions of years water collected to form the oceans. Water began to cycle on Earth as water evaporated from the oceans and returned again as rainfall. 	earths mantle is made entirely of liquid rock	false
Our solar system began about 5 billion years ago. The Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time. 	the sun planets and other solar system objects formed at about the same time	true
Our solar system began about 5 billion years ago. The Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time. 	there was a lot of space debris in the early solar system	true
An atmosphere is the gases that surround a planet. The early Earth had no atmosphere. Conditions were so hot that gases were not stable. 	early earth was much like earth today	false
An atmosphere is the gases that surround a planet. The early Earth had no atmosphere. Conditions were so hot that gases were not stable. 	before there was an ocean there was water vapor in the atmosphere	true
Our solar system began about 5 billion years ago. The Sun, planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time. 	earths moon began as a dwarf planet orbiting the sun	false
An atmosphere is the gases that surround a planet. The early Earth had no atmosphere. Conditions were so hot that gases were not stable. 	from the time it first formed earth has always had an atmosphere	false
An atmosphere is the gases that surround a planet. The early Earth had no atmosphere. Conditions were so hot that gases were not stable. 	some of the gases in earths early atmosphere came from comets	true
The first organisms to photosynthesize were cyanobacteria. These organisms may have been around as far back as 3.5 billion years and are still alive today (Figure 12.7). Now they are called blue-green algae. They are common in lakes and seas and account for 20% to 30% of photosynthesis today. 	prokaryoes are more common than eukaryotes	false
Life probably began in the oceans. No one knows exactly how or when. Life may have originated more than once. If life began before the Moon formed, that impact would have wiped it out and it would have had to originate again. Eventually conditions on Earth became less violent. The planet could support life. The first organisms were made of only one cell (Figure 12.6). The earliest cells were prokaryotes. Prokaryotic cells are surrounded by a cell membrane, but they do not have a nucleus. The cells got their nutrients directly from the water. The cells needed to use these nutrients to live and grow. The cells also needed to be able to make copies of themselves. To do this they stored genetic information in nucleic acids. The two nucleic acids are DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and RNA (ribonucleic acid). Nucleic acids pass 	dna is short for deoxyribonucleic acid	true
There are times in Earth history when all of the continents came together to form a supercontinent. Supercontinents come together and then break apart. Pangaea was the last supercontinent on Earth, but it was not the first. The supercontinent before Pangaea is called Rodinia. Rodinia contained about 75% of the continental landmass that is present today. The supercontinent came together about 1.1 billion years ago. Rodinia was not the first supercontinent either. Scientists think that three supercontinents came before Rodina, making five so far in Earth history. 	rodinia was the first supercontinent	false
Since the early Earth was very hot, mantle convection was very rapid. Plate tectonics likely moved very quickly. The early Earth was a very active place with abundant volcanic eruptions and earthquakes. The remnants of these early rocks are now seen in the ancient cores of the continents. 	early in earth history mantle convection was super fast	true
For life to become even more complex, multicellular organisms needed to evolve. Prokaryotes and eukaryotes can be multicellular. Toward the end of the Precambrian, the Ediacara Fauna evolved (Figure 12.8). These are the fossils discovered by Walcott in the introduction to the next section. The Ediacara was extremely diverse. They appeared after Earth defrosted from a worldwide glaciation. The Ediacara fauna seem to have died out. Other multicellular organisms appeared in the Phanerozoic. 	the evolution from prokaryotes to eukaryotes to multicellular organisms took a few million years	false
Life probably began in the oceans. No one knows exactly how or when. Life may have originated more than once. If life began before the Moon formed, that impact would have wiped it out and it would have had to originate again. Eventually conditions on Earth became less violent. The planet could support life. The first organisms were made of only one cell (Figure 12.6). The earliest cells were prokaryotes. Prokaryotic cells are surrounded by a cell membrane, but they do not have a nucleus. The cells got their nutrients directly from the water. The cells needed to use these nutrients to live and grow. The cells also needed to be able to make copies of themselves. To do this they stored genetic information in nucleic acids. The two nucleic acids are DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and RNA (ribonucleic acid). Nucleic acids pass 	nucleic acids in living things include dna and rna	true
The earliest crust was probably basalt. It may have resembled the current seafloor. This crust formed before there were any oceans. More than 4 billion years ago, continental crust appeared. The first continents were very small compared with those today. 	continental crust first appeared on earth about 2 billion years ago	false
The earliest crust was probably basalt. It may have resembled the current seafloor. This crust formed before there were any oceans. More than 4 billion years ago, continental crust appeared. The first continents were very small compared with those today. 	the first continents on earth were very large compared with those today	false
There are times in Earth history when all of the continents came together to form a supercontinent. Supercontinents come together and then break apart. Pangaea was the last supercontinent on Earth, but it was not the first. The supercontinent before Pangaea is called Rodinia. Rodinia contained about 75% of the continental landmass that is present today. The supercontinent came together about 1.1 billion years ago. Rodinia was not the first supercontinent either. Scientists think that three supercontinents came before Rodina, making five so far in Earth history. 	pangaea was the first supercontinent to form on earth	false
For the first 4 billion years of Earth history there is only a little evidence of life. Organisms were tiny and soft and did not fossilize well. But scientists use a variety of ways to figure out what this early life was like. 	life may have originated on earth more than once	true
Early cells took nutrients from the water. Eventually the nutrients would have become less abundant. Around 3 billion years ago, photosynthesis began. Organisms could make their own food from sunlight and inorganic molecules. From these ingredients they made chemical energy that they used. Oxygen is a waste product of photosynthesis. That first oxygen combined with iron to create iron oxide. Later on, the oxygen entered the atmosphere. Some of the oxygen in the atmosphere became ozone. The ozone layer formed to protect Earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation. This made the environment able to support more complex life forms. 	the first oxygen on earth combined with iron to form iron oxide	true
Early cells took nutrients from the water. Eventually the nutrients would have become less abundant. Around 3 billion years ago, photosynthesis began. Organisms could make their own food from sunlight and inorganic molecules. From these ingredients they made chemical energy that they used. Oxygen is a waste product of photosynthesis. That first oxygen combined with iron to create iron oxide. Later on, the oxygen entered the atmosphere. Some of the oxygen in the atmosphere became ozone. The ozone layer formed to protect Earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation. This made the environment able to support more complex life forms. 	some of the oxygen in earths early atmosphere became ozone	true
For the first 4 billion years of Earth history there is only a little evidence of life. Organisms were tiny and soft and did not fossilize well. But scientists use a variety of ways to figure out what this early life was like. 	the first photosynthetic organisms were most like modern e coli	false
For the first 4 billion years of Earth history there is only a little evidence of life. Organisms were tiny and soft and did not fossilize well. But scientists use a variety of ways to figure out what this early life was like. 	there are no longer any prokaryotes living on earth	false
For life to become even more complex, multicellular organisms needed to evolve. Prokaryotes and eukaryotes can be multicellular. Toward the end of the Precambrian, the Ediacara Fauna evolved (Figure 12.8). These are the fossils discovered by Walcott in the introduction to the next section. The Ediacara was extremely diverse. They appeared after Earth defrosted from a worldwide glaciation. The Ediacara fauna seem to have died out. Other multicellular organisms appeared in the Phanerozoic. 	ediacara fauna evolved toward the end of the precambrian era	true
The first organisms to photosynthesize were cyanobacteria. These organisms may have been around as far back as 3.5 billion years and are still alive today (Figure 12.7). Now they are called blue-green algae. They are common in lakes and seas and account for 20% to 30% of photosynthesis today. 	first organisms to make food by photosynthesis	1.e
Eukaryotes evolved about 2 billion years ago. Unlike prokaryotes, eukaryotes have a cell nucleus. They have more structures and are better organized. Organelles within a eukaryote can perform certain functions. Some supply energy; some break down wastes. Eukaryotes were better able to live and so became the dominant life form. 	type of organism that contains a nucleus in its cells	2.c
Early cells took nutrients from the water. Eventually the nutrients would have become less abundant. Around 3 billion years ago, photosynthesis began. Organisms could make their own food from sunlight and inorganic molecules. From these ingredients they made chemical energy that they used. Oxygen is a waste product of photosynthesis. That first oxygen combined with iron to create iron oxide. Later on, the oxygen entered the atmosphere. Some of the oxygen in the atmosphere became ozone. The ozone layer formed to protect Earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation. This made the environment able to support more complex life forms. 	process that added oxygen to earths early atmosphere	3.g
For the first 4 billion years of Earth history there is only a little evidence of life. Organisms were tiny and soft and did not fossilize well. But scientists use a variety of ways to figure out what this early life was like. 	gas that protects earth from harmful radiation	4.f
Eukaryotes evolved about 2 billion years ago. Unlike prokaryotes, eukaryotes have a cell nucleus. They have more structures and are better organized. Organelles within a eukaryote can perform certain functions. Some supply energy; some break down wastes. Eukaryotes were better able to live and so became the dominant life form. 	type of organism that lacks a nucleus in its cells	5.d
Life probably began in the oceans. No one knows exactly how or when. Life may have originated more than once. If life began before the Moon formed, that impact would have wiped it out and it would have had to originate again. Eventually conditions on Earth became less violent. The planet could support life. The first organisms were made of only one cell (Figure 12.6). The earliest cells were prokaryotes. Prokaryotic cells are surrounded by a cell membrane, but they do not have a nucleus. The cells got their nutrients directly from the water. The cells needed to use these nutrients to live and grow. The cells also needed to be able to make copies of themselves. To do this they stored genetic information in nucleic acids. The two nucleic acids are DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and RNA (ribonucleic acid). Nucleic acids pass 	organic compound that stores genetic information	6.a
Early cells took nutrients from the water. Eventually the nutrients would have become less abundant. Around 3 billion years ago, photosynthesis began. Organisms could make their own food from sunlight and inorganic molecules. From these ingredients they made chemical energy that they used. Oxygen is a waste product of photosynthesis. That first oxygen combined with iron to create iron oxide. Later on, the oxygen entered the atmosphere. Some of the oxygen in the atmosphere became ozone. The ozone layer formed to protect Earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation. This made the environment able to support more complex life forms. 	waste product of photosynthesis	7.b
Earth is often called the water planet. Figure 13.1 shows why. If astronauts see Earth from space, this is how it looks. Notice how blue the planet appears. Thats because oceans cover much of Earths surface. Water is also found in the clouds that rise above the planet. Most of Earths water is salt water in the oceans. As Figure 13.2 shows, only 3 percent of Earths water is fresh. Freshwater is water that contains little or no dissolved salt. Most freshwater is frozen in ice caps and glaciers. Glaciers cover the peaks of some tall mountains. For example, the Cascades Mountains in North America and the Alps Mountains in Europe are capped with ice. Ice caps cover vast areas of Antarctica and Greenland. Chunks of ice frequently break off ice caps. They form icebergs that float in the oceans. 	icebergs are made of frozen salt water	false
Did you ever wonder where the water in your glass came from or where its been? The next time you take a drink of water, think about this. Each water molecule has probably been around for billions of years. Thats because Earths water is constantly recycled. 	almost 80 percent of earths fresh water is frozen	true
Did you ever wonder where the water in your glass came from or where its been? The next time you take a drink of water, think about this. Each water molecule has probably been around for billions of years. Thats because Earths water is constantly recycled. 	there is more water in earths living things than there is in the atmosphere	false
Water keeps changing state as it goes through the water cycle. This means that it can be a solid, liquid, or gas. How does water change state? How does it keep moving through the cycle? As Figure 13.3 shows, several processes are involved. Evaporation changes liquid water to water vapor. Energy from the Sun causes water to evaporate. Most evaporation is from the oceans because they cover so much area. The water vapor rises into the atmosphere. Transpiration is like evaporation because it changes liquid water to water vapor. In transpiration, plants release water vapor through their leaves. This water vapor rises into the atmosphere. Condensation changes water vapor to liquid water. As air rises higher into the atmosphere, it cools. Cool air can hold less water vapor than warm air. So some of the water vapor condenses into water droplets. Water droplets may form clouds. Precipitation is water that falls from clouds to Earths surface. Water droplets in clouds fall to Earth when they become too large to stay aloft. The water falls as rain if the air is warm. If the air is cold, the water may freeze and fall as snow, sleet, or hail. Most precipitation falls into the oceans. Some falls on land. Runoff is precipitation that flows over the surface of the land. This water may travel to a river, lake, or ocean. Runoff may pick up fertilizer and other pollutants and deliver them to the water body where it ends up. In this way, runoff may pollute bodies of water. Infiltration is the process by which water soaks into the ground. Some of the water may seep deep under- ground. Some may stay in the soil, where plants can absorb it with their roots. In all these ways, water keeps cycling. The water cycle repeats over and over again. Who knows? Maybe a water molecule that you drink today once quenched the thirst of a dinosaur. 	soil moisture is important for plants to grow	true
Did you ever wonder where the water in your glass came from or where its been? The next time you take a drink of water, think about this. Each water molecule has probably been around for billions of years. Thats because Earths water is constantly recycled. 	some water molecules may be billions of years old	true
Water is a simple chemical compound. Each molecule of water contains two hydrogen atoms (H2 ) and one oxygen atom (O). Thats why the chemical formula for water is H2 O. If water is so simple, why is it special? Water is one of the few substances that exists on Earth in all three states of matter. Water occurs as a gas, a liquid and a solid. You drink liquid water and use it to shower. You breathe gaseous water vapor in the air. You may go ice skating on a pond covered with solid water ice in the winter. 	water exists on earth in all three states of matter	true
Water is recycled through the water cycle. The water cycle is the movement of water through the oceans, atmo- sphere, land, and living things. The water cycle is powered by energy from the Sun. Figure 13.3 diagrams the water cycle. 	the water cycle has no beginning or end	true
Water is recycled through the water cycle. The water cycle is the movement of water through the oceans, atmo- sphere, land, and living things. The water cycle is powered by energy from the Sun. Figure 13.3 diagrams the water cycle. 	water can go through the water cycle without changing state	false
Water is a simple chemical compound. Each molecule of water contains two hydrogen atoms (H2 ) and one oxygen atom (O). Thats why the chemical formula for water is H2 O. If water is so simple, why is it special? Water is one of the few substances that exists on Earth in all three states of matter. Water occurs as a gas, a liquid and a solid. You drink liquid water and use it to shower. You breathe gaseous water vapor in the air. You may go ice skating on a pond covered with solid water ice in the winter. 	water turns to gas through condensation	false
Water is recycled through the water cycle. The water cycle is the movement of water through the oceans, atmo- sphere, land, and living things. The water cycle is powered by energy from the Sun. Figure 13.3 diagrams the water cycle. 	most condensation of water takes place in the oceans	false
Water is a simple chemical compound. Each molecule of water contains two hydrogen atoms (H2 ) and one oxygen atom (O). Thats why the chemical formula for water is H2 O. If water is so simple, why is it special? Water is one of the few substances that exists on Earth in all three states of matter. Water occurs as a gas, a liquid and a solid. You drink liquid water and use it to shower. You breathe gaseous water vapor in the air. You may go ice skating on a pond covered with solid water ice in the winter. 	the atoms that make up water molecules come together and break apart easily	false
Water keeps changing state as it goes through the water cycle. This means that it can be a solid, liquid, or gas. How does water change state? How does it keep moving through the cycle? As Figure 13.3 shows, several processes are involved. Evaporation changes liquid water to water vapor. Energy from the Sun causes water to evaporate. Most evaporation is from the oceans because they cover so much area. The water vapor rises into the atmosphere. Transpiration is like evaporation because it changes liquid water to water vapor. In transpiration, plants release water vapor through their leaves. This water vapor rises into the atmosphere. Condensation changes water vapor to liquid water. As air rises higher into the atmosphere, it cools. Cool air can hold less water vapor than warm air. So some of the water vapor condenses into water droplets. Water droplets may form clouds. Precipitation is water that falls from clouds to Earths surface. Water droplets in clouds fall to Earth when they become too large to stay aloft. The water falls as rain if the air is warm. If the air is cold, the water may freeze and fall as snow, sleet, or hail. Most precipitation falls into the oceans. Some falls on land. Runoff is precipitation that flows over the surface of the land. This water may travel to a river, lake, or ocean. Runoff may pick up fertilizer and other pollutants and deliver them to the water body where it ends up. In this way, runoff may pollute bodies of water. Infiltration is the process by which water soaks into the ground. Some of the water may seep deep under- ground. Some may stay in the soil, where plants can absorb it with their roots. In all these ways, water keeps cycling. The water cycle repeats over and over again. Who knows? Maybe a water molecule that you drink today once quenched the thirst of a dinosaur. 	cold air can hold less water than warm air so when air cools water may condense	true
Water keeps changing state as it goes through the water cycle. This means that it can be a solid, liquid, or gas. How does water change state? How does it keep moving through the cycle? As Figure 13.3 shows, several processes are involved. Evaporation changes liquid water to water vapor. Energy from the Sun causes water to evaporate. Most evaporation is from the oceans because they cover so much area. The water vapor rises into the atmosphere. Transpiration is like evaporation because it changes liquid water to water vapor. In transpiration, plants release water vapor through their leaves. This water vapor rises into the atmosphere. Condensation changes water vapor to liquid water. As air rises higher into the atmosphere, it cools. Cool air can hold less water vapor than warm air. So some of the water vapor condenses into water droplets. Water droplets may form clouds. Precipitation is water that falls from clouds to Earths surface. Water droplets in clouds fall to Earth when they become too large to stay aloft. The water falls as rain if the air is warm. If the air is cold, the water may freeze and fall as snow, sleet, or hail. Most precipitation falls into the oceans. Some falls on land. Runoff is precipitation that flows over the surface of the land. This water may travel to a river, lake, or ocean. Runoff may pick up fertilizer and other pollutants and deliver them to the water body where it ends up. In this way, runoff may pollute bodies of water. Infiltration is the process by which water soaks into the ground. Some of the water may seep deep under- ground. Some may stay in the soil, where plants can absorb it with their roots. In all these ways, water keeps cycling. The water cycle repeats over and over again. Who knows? Maybe a water molecule that you drink today once quenched the thirst of a dinosaur. 	water that forms clouds always falls to the ground as precipitation	false
Water is recycled through the water cycle. The water cycle is the movement of water through the oceans, atmo- sphere, land, and living things. The water cycle is powered by energy from the Sun. Figure 13.3 diagrams the water cycle. 	runoff may pollute rivers lakes and oceans	true
Did you ever wonder where the water in your glass came from or where its been? The next time you take a drink of water, think about this. Each water molecule has probably been around for billions of years. Thats because Earths water is constantly recycled. 	most of earths precipitation falls on land	false
Did you ever wonder where the water in your glass came from or where its been? The next time you take a drink of water, think about this. Each water molecule has probably been around for billions of years. Thats because Earths water is constantly recycled. 	water that falls from clouds to earths surface	1.f
Water is recycled through the water cycle. The water cycle is the movement of water through the oceans, atmo- sphere, land, and living things. The water cycle is powered by energy from the Sun. Figure 13.3 diagrams the water cycle. 	continuous movement of water through the oceans atmosphere land and living things	2.d
Water keeps changing state as it goes through the water cycle. This means that it can be a solid, liquid, or gas. How does water change state? How does it keep moving through the cycle? As Figure 13.3 shows, several processes are involved. Evaporation changes liquid water to water vapor. Energy from the Sun causes water to evaporate. Most evaporation is from the oceans because they cover so much area. The water vapor rises into the atmosphere. Transpiration is like evaporation because it changes liquid water to water vapor. In transpiration, plants release water vapor through their leaves. This water vapor rises into the atmosphere. Condensation changes water vapor to liquid water. As air rises higher into the atmosphere, it cools. Cool air can hold less water vapor than warm air. So some of the water vapor condenses into water droplets. Water droplets may form clouds. Precipitation is water that falls from clouds to Earths surface. Water droplets in clouds fall to Earth when they become too large to stay aloft. The water falls as rain if the air is warm. If the air is cold, the water may freeze and fall as snow, sleet, or hail. Most precipitation falls into the oceans. Some falls on land. Runoff is precipitation that flows over the surface of the land. This water may travel to a river, lake, or ocean. Runoff may pick up fertilizer and other pollutants and deliver them to the water body where it ends up. In this way, runoff may pollute bodies of water. Infiltration is the process by which water soaks into the ground. Some of the water may seep deep under- ground. Some may stay in the soil, where plants can absorb it with their roots. In all these ways, water keeps cycling. The water cycle repeats over and over again. Who knows? Maybe a water molecule that you drink today once quenched the thirst of a dinosaur. 	process in which plants release water vapor through their leaves	3.e
Water keeps changing state as it goes through the water cycle. This means that it can be a solid, liquid, or gas. How does water change state? How does it keep moving through the cycle? As Figure 13.3 shows, several processes are involved. Evaporation changes liquid water to water vapor. Energy from the Sun causes water to evaporate. Most evaporation is from the oceans because they cover so much area. The water vapor rises into the atmosphere. Transpiration is like evaporation because it changes liquid water to water vapor. In transpiration, plants release water vapor through their leaves. This water vapor rises into the atmosphere. Condensation changes water vapor to liquid water. As air rises higher into the atmosphere, it cools. Cool air can hold less water vapor than warm air. So some of the water vapor condenses into water droplets. Water droplets may form clouds. Precipitation is water that falls from clouds to Earths surface. Water droplets in clouds fall to Earth when they become too large to stay aloft. The water falls as rain if the air is warm. If the air is cold, the water may freeze and fall as snow, sleet, or hail. Most precipitation falls into the oceans. Some falls on land. Runoff is precipitation that flows over the surface of the land. This water may travel to a river, lake, or ocean. Runoff may pick up fertilizer and other pollutants and deliver them to the water body where it ends up. In this way, runoff may pollute bodies of water. Infiltration is the process by which water soaks into the ground. Some of the water may seep deep under- ground. Some may stay in the soil, where plants can absorb it with their roots. In all these ways, water keeps cycling. The water cycle repeats over and over again. Who knows? Maybe a water molecule that you drink today once quenched the thirst of a dinosaur. 	precipitation that flows over the surface of the ground	4.g
Water is a simple chemical compound. Each molecule of water contains two hydrogen atoms (H2 ) and one oxygen atom (O). Thats why the chemical formula for water is H2 O. If water is so simple, why is it special? Water is one of the few substances that exists on Earth in all three states of matter. Water occurs as a gas, a liquid and a solid. You drink liquid water and use it to shower. You breathe gaseous water vapor in the air. You may go ice skating on a pond covered with solid water ice in the winter. 	process in which water vapor changes to liquid water	5. a
Water is a simple chemical compound. Each molecule of water contains two hydrogen atoms (H2 ) and one oxygen atom (O). Thats why the chemical formula for water is H2 O. If water is so simple, why is it special? Water is one of the few substances that exists on Earth in all three states of matter. Water occurs as a gas, a liquid and a solid. You drink liquid water and use it to shower. You breathe gaseous water vapor in the air. You may go ice skating on a pond covered with solid water ice in the winter. 	process in which liquid water changes to water vapor	6. b
Water keeps changing state as it goes through the water cycle. This means that it can be a solid, liquid, or gas. How does water change state? How does it keep moving through the cycle? As Figure 13.3 shows, several processes are involved. Evaporation changes liquid water to water vapor. Energy from the Sun causes water to evaporate. Most evaporation is from the oceans because they cover so much area. The water vapor rises into the atmosphere. Transpiration is like evaporation because it changes liquid water to water vapor. In transpiration, plants release water vapor through their leaves. This water vapor rises into the atmosphere. Condensation changes water vapor to liquid water. As air rises higher into the atmosphere, it cools. Cool air can hold less water vapor than warm air. So some of the water vapor condenses into water droplets. Water droplets may form clouds. Precipitation is water that falls from clouds to Earths surface. Water droplets in clouds fall to Earth when they become too large to stay aloft. The water falls as rain if the air is warm. If the air is cold, the water may freeze and fall as snow, sleet, or hail. Most precipitation falls into the oceans. Some falls on land. Runoff is precipitation that flows over the surface of the land. This water may travel to a river, lake, or ocean. Runoff may pick up fertilizer and other pollutants and deliver them to the water body where it ends up. In this way, runoff may pollute bodies of water. Infiltration is the process by which water soaks into the ground. Some of the water may seep deep under- ground. Some may stay in the soil, where plants can absorb it with their roots. In all these ways, water keeps cycling. The water cycle repeats over and over again. Who knows? Maybe a water molecule that you drink today once quenched the thirst of a dinosaur. 	process in which water soaks into the ground	7. c
Look at the pictures of flowing water in Figure 13.4. A waterfall tumbles down a mountainside. A brook babbles through a forest. A river slowly meanders through a broad valley. What do all these forms of flowing water have in common? They are all streams. 	a brook is a type of wetland	false
A stream is a body of freshwater that flows downhill in a channel. The channel of a stream has a bottom, or bed, and sides called banks. Any size body of flowing water can be called a stream. Usually, though, a large stream is called a river. 	a stream always flows from a higher to a lower elevation	true
A stream is a body of freshwater that flows downhill in a channel. The channel of a stream has a bottom, or bed, and sides called banks. Any size body of flowing water can be called a stream. Usually, though, a large stream is called a river. 	the bottom of a river channel is called the bank	false
A stream is a body of freshwater that flows downhill in a channel. The channel of a stream has a bottom, or bed, and sides called banks. Any size body of flowing water can be called a stream. Usually, though, a large stream is called a river. 	streams usually begin with water from snow melt and possibly springs	true
A stream is a body of freshwater that flows downhill in a channel. The channel of a stream has a bottom, or bed, and sides called banks. Any size body of flowing water can be called a stream. Usually, though, a large stream is called a river. 	a single stream always has just one source	false
A stream is a body of freshwater that flows downhill in a channel. The channel of a stream has a bottom, or bed, and sides called banks. Any size body of flowing water can be called a stream. Usually, though, a large stream is called a river. 	a single stream will have a single water source	false
Ponds and lakes may get their water from several sources. Some falls directly into them as precipitation. Some enters as runoff and some from streams and rivers. Water leaves ponds and lakes through evaporation and also as outflow. 	moving water slows down when it enters a body of still water	true
A stream is a body of freshwater that flows downhill in a channel. The channel of a stream has a bottom, or bed, and sides called banks. Any size body of flowing water can be called a stream. Usually, though, a large stream is called a river. 	a rivers basin is also called its bed	false
Ponds and lakes may get their water from several sources. Some falls directly into them as precipitation. Some enters as runoff and some from streams and rivers. Water leaves ponds and lakes through evaporation and also as outflow. 	the great lakes are in basins carved by glaciers	true
All of the land drained by a river system is called its basin, or watershed. One river systems basin is separated from another river systems basin by a divide. The divide is created by the highest points between the two river basins. Precipitation that falls within a river basin always flows toward that river. Precipitation that falls on the other side of the divide flows toward a different river. Figure 13.6 shows the major river basins in the U.S. You can watch an animation of water flowing through a river basin at this link: http://trashfree.org/btw/graphics/watershed_anim.gif 	a divide is the lowest point between two river basins	false
A stream is a body of freshwater that flows downhill in a channel. The channel of a stream has a bottom, or bed, and sides called banks. Any size body of flowing water can be called a stream. Usually, though, a large stream is called a river. 	a stream is a small river	false
All streams and rivers have several features in common. These features are shown in (Figure 13.5). The place where a stream or river starts is its source. The source might be a spring, where water flows out of the ground. Or the source might be water from melting snow on a mountain top. A single stream may have multiple sources. A stream or river probably ends when it flows into a body of water, such as a lake or an ocean. A stream ends at its mouth. As the water flows into the body of water, it slows down and drops the sediment it was carrying. The sediment may build up to form a delta. Several other features of streams and rivers are also shown in Figure 13.5. Small streams often flow into bigger streams or rivers. The small streams are called tributaries. A river and all its tributaries make up a river system. At certain times of year, a stream or river may overflow its banks. The area of land that is flooded is called the floodplain. The floodplain may be very wide where the river flows over a nearly flat surface. A river flowing over a floodplain may wear away broad curves. These curves are called meanders. 	a floodplain may be very wide and flat	true
Ponds and lakes may get their water from several sources. Some falls directly into them as precipitation. Some enters as runoff and some from streams and rivers. Water leaves ponds and lakes through evaporation and also as outflow. 	all lakes have fresh water	false
After a heavy rain, you may find puddles of water standing in low spots. The same principle explains why water collects in ponds and lakes. Water travels downhill, so a depression in the ground fills with standing water. A pond is a small body of standing water. A lake is a large body of standing water. Most lakes have freshwater, but a few are salty. The Great Salt Lake in Utah is an example of a saltwater lake. The water in a large lake may be so deep that sunlight cannot penetrate all the way to the bottom. Without sunlight, water plants and algae cannot live on the bottom of the lake. Thats because plants need sunlight for photosynthesis. The largest lakes in the world are the Great Lakes. They lie between the U.S. and Canada, as shown in Figure 13.7. How great are they? They hold 22 percent of all the worlds fresh surface water! 	sunlight may not be able to reach the bottom of a deep lake	true
Ponds and lakes may get their water from several sources. Some falls directly into them as precipitation. Some enters as runoff and some from streams and rivers. Water leaves ponds and lakes through evaporation and also as outflow. 	the great lakes are volcanic lakes	false
After a heavy rain, you may find puddles of water standing in low spots. The same principle explains why water collects in ponds and lakes. Water travels downhill, so a depression in the ground fills with standing water. A pond is a small body of standing water. A lake is a large body of standing water. Most lakes have freshwater, but a few are salty. The Great Salt Lake in Utah is an example of a saltwater lake. The water in a large lake may be so deep that sunlight cannot penetrate all the way to the bottom. Without sunlight, water plants and algae cannot live on the bottom of the lake. Thats because plants need sunlight for photosynthesis. The largest lakes in the world are the Great Lakes. They lie between the U.S. and Canada, as shown in Figure 13.7. How great are they? They hold 22 percent of all the worlds fresh surface water! 	small body of standing water	1.c
A stream is a body of freshwater that flows downhill in a channel. The channel of a stream has a bottom, or bed, and sides called banks. Any size body of flowing water can be called a stream. Usually, though, a large stream is called a river. 	event in which a body of water overflows its banks	2.a
Some of Earths freshwater is found in wetlands. A wetland is an area that is covered with water, or at least has very soggy soil, during all or part of the year. Certain species of plants thrive in wetlands, and they are rich ecosystems. Freshwater wetlands are usually found at the edges of steams, rivers, ponds, or lakes. Wetlands can also be found at the edges of seas. 	area that is covered with water or has soggy soil during all or part of the year	3.f
A stream is a body of freshwater that flows downhill in a channel. The channel of a stream has a bottom, or bed, and sides called banks. Any size body of flowing water can be called a stream. Usually, though, a large stream is called a river. 	any body of fresh water that flows downhill in a channel	4.e
A stream is a body of freshwater that flows downhill in a channel. The channel of a stream has a bottom, or bed, and sides called banks. Any size body of flowing water can be called a stream. Usually, though, a large stream is called a river. 	large body of fresh water that flows downhill in a channel	5.d
After a heavy rain, you may find puddles of water standing in low spots. The same principle explains why water collects in ponds and lakes. Water travels downhill, so a depression in the ground fills with standing water. A pond is a small body of standing water. A lake is a large body of standing water. Most lakes have freshwater, but a few are salty. The Great Salt Lake in Utah is an example of a saltwater lake. The water in a large lake may be so deep that sunlight cannot penetrate all the way to the bottom. Without sunlight, water plants and algae cannot live on the bottom of the lake. Thats because plants need sunlight for photosynthesis. The largest lakes in the world are the Great Lakes. They lie between the U.S. and Canada, as shown in Figure 13.7. How great are they? They hold 22 percent of all the worlds fresh surface water! 	large body of standing water	6.b
All of the land drained by a river system is called its basin, or watershed. One river systems basin is separated from another river systems basin by a divide. The divide is created by the highest points between the two river basins. Precipitation that falls within a river basin always flows toward that river. Precipitation that falls on the other side of the divide flows toward a different river. Figure 13.6 shows the major river basins in the U.S. You can watch an animation of water flowing through a river basin at this link: http://trashfree.org/btw/graphics/watershed_anim.gif 	all of the land drained by a river system	7.g
The top of the saturated rock layer in Figure 13.11 is called the water table. The water table isnt like a real table. It doesnt remain firmly in one place. Instead, it rises or falls, depending on how much water seeps down from the surface. The water table is higher when there is a lot of rain and lower when the weather is dry. 	the water table in an area may rise or fall	true
An underground layer of rock that is saturated with groundwater is called an aquifer. A diagram of an aquifer is shown in Figure 13.12. Aquifers are generally found in porous rock, such as sandstone. Water infiltrates the aquifer from the surface. The water that enters the aquifer is called recharge. 	an aquifer usually forms in a layer of clay	false
An underground layer of rock that is saturated with groundwater is called an aquifer. A diagram of an aquifer is shown in Figure 13.12. Aquifers are generally found in porous rock, such as sandstone. Water infiltrates the aquifer from the surface. The water that enters the aquifer is called recharge. 	the rock layer below an aquifer always consists of permeable rock	false
Some springs have water that contains minerals. Groundwater dissolves minerals out of the rock as it seeps through the pores. The water in some springs is hot because it is heated by hot magma. Many hot springs are also mineral springs. Thats because hot water can dissolve more minerals than cold water. Grand Prismatic Spring, shown in Figure 13.16, is a hot mineral spring. Dissolved minerals give its water a bright blue color. The edge of the spring is covered with thick orange mats of bacteria. The bacteria use the minerals in the hot water to make food. 	water in hot springs is heated by hot magma	true
Most land areas have aquifers beneath them. Many aquifers are used by people for freshwater. The closer to the surface an aquifer is, the easier it is to get the water. However, an aquifer close to the surface is also more likely to become polluted. Pollutants can seep down through porous rock in recharge water. An aquifer that is used by people may not be recharged as quickly as its water is removed. The water table may lower and the aquifer may even run dry. If this happens, the ground above the aquifer may sink. This is likely to damage any homes or other structures built above the aquifer. 	very few land areas have aquifers beneath them	false
An underground layer of rock that is saturated with groundwater is called an aquifer. A diagram of an aquifer is shown in Figure 13.12. Aquifers are generally found in porous rock, such as sandstone. Water infiltrates the aquifer from the surface. The water that enters the aquifer is called recharge. 	aquifers are generally found at the same depths	false
Most land areas have aquifers beneath them. Many aquifers are used by people for freshwater. The closer to the surface an aquifer is, the easier it is to get the water. However, an aquifer close to the surface is also more likely to become polluted. Pollutants can seep down through porous rock in recharge water. An aquifer that is used by people may not be recharged as quickly as its water is removed. The water table may lower and the aquifer may even run dry. If this happens, the ground above the aquifer may sink. This is likely to damage any homes or other structures built above the aquifer. 	it is impossible for an aquifer to ever run dry	false
One of the biggest aquifers in the world is the Ogallala aquifer. As you can see from Figure 13.13, this aquifer lies beneath parts of eight U.S. states. It covers a total area of 451,000 square kilometers (174,000 square miles). In some places, it is less than a meter deep. In other places, it is hundreds of meters deep. The Ogallala aquifer is an important source of freshwater in the American Midwest. This is a major farming area, and much of the water is used to irrigate crops. The water in this aquifer is being used up ten times faster than it is recharged. If this continues, what might happen to the Ogallala aquifer? 	the ogallala aquifer is one of the biggest aquifers in the world	true
Freshwater below Earths surface is called groundwater. The water infiltrates, or seeps down into, the ground from the surface. How does this happen? And where does the water go? 	land use in an area can affect the amount of water that is available to enter groundwater	true
One of the biggest aquifers in the world is the Ogallala aquifer. As you can see from Figure 13.13, this aquifer lies beneath parts of eight U.S. states. It covers a total area of 451,000 square kilometers (174,000 square miles). In some places, it is less than a meter deep. In other places, it is hundreds of meters deep. The Ogallala aquifer is an important source of freshwater in the American Midwest. This is a major farming area, and much of the water is used to irrigate crops. The water in this aquifer is being used up ten times faster than it is recharged. If this continues, what might happen to the Ogallala aquifer? 	much of the water taken from the ogallala aquifer is used to irrigate crops	true
An underground layer of rock that is saturated with groundwater is called an aquifer. A diagram of an aquifer is shown in Figure 13.12. Aquifers are generally found in porous rock, such as sandstone. Water infiltrates the aquifer from the surface. The water that enters the aquifer is called recharge. 	a good aquifer has rock in it that is porous and permeable	true
An underground layer of rock that is saturated with groundwater is called an aquifer. A diagram of an aquifer is shown in Figure 13.12. Aquifers are generally found in porous rock, such as sandstone. Water infiltrates the aquifer from the surface. The water that enters the aquifer is called recharge. 	the bottom layer of an aquifer has impermeable rock	true
Some springs have water that contains minerals. Groundwater dissolves minerals out of the rock as it seeps through the pores. The water in some springs is hot because it is heated by hot magma. Many hot springs are also mineral springs. Thats because hot water can dissolve more minerals than cold water. Grand Prismatic Spring, shown in Figure 13.16, is a hot mineral spring. Dissolved minerals give its water a bright blue color. The edge of the spring is covered with thick orange mats of bacteria. The bacteria use the minerals in the hot water to make food. 	many hot springs are also mineral springs	true
An underground layer of rock that is saturated with groundwater is called an aquifer. A diagram of an aquifer is shown in Figure 13.12. Aquifers are generally found in porous rock, such as sandstone. Water infiltrates the aquifer from the surface. The water that enters the aquifer is called recharge. 	the water table keeps water in an aquifer from seeping deeper underground	false
The top of an aquifer may be high enough in some places to meet the surface of the ground. This often happens on a slope. The water flows out of the ground and creates a spring. A spring may be just a tiny trickle, or it may be a big gush of water. One of the largest springs in the world is Big Spring in Missouri, seen in Figure 13.14. Water flowing out of the ground at a spring may flow downhill and enter a stream. Thats what happens to the water that flows out of Big Spring in Missouri. If the water from a spring cant flow downhill, it may spread out to form a pond or lake instead. Lake George in New York State, which is pictured in Figure 13.15, is a spring-fed lake. The lake basin was carved by a glacier. 	water flows out of a well due to gravity	false
Water infiltrates the ground because soil and rock are porous. Between the grains are pores, or tiny holes. Since water can move through this rock it is permeable. Eventually, the water reaches a layer of rock that is not porous and so is impermeable. Water stops moving downward when it reaches this layer of rock. Look at the diagram in Figure 13.11. It shows two layers of porous rock. The top layer is not saturated; it is not full of water. The next layer is saturated. The water in this layer has nowhere else to go. It cannot seep any deeper into the ground because the rock below it is impermeable. 	not having tiny holes that water can pass through	1.g
An underground layer of rock that is saturated with groundwater is called an aquifer. A diagram of an aquifer is shown in Figure 13.12. Aquifers are generally found in porous rock, such as sandstone. Water infiltrates the aquifer from the surface. The water that enters the aquifer is called recharge. 	underground rock layer that is saturated with water	2.a
Water infiltrates the ground because soil and rock are porous. Between the grains are pores, or tiny holes. Since water can move through this rock it is permeable. Eventually, the water reaches a layer of rock that is not porous and so is impermeable. Water stops moving downward when it reaches this layer of rock. Look at the diagram in Figure 13.11. It shows two layers of porous rock. The top layer is not saturated; it is not full of water. The next layer is saturated. The water in this layer has nowhere else to go. It cannot seep any deeper into the ground because the rock below it is impermeable. 	having tiny holes that water can pass through	3.c
An underground layer of rock that is saturated with groundwater is called an aquifer. A diagram of an aquifer is shown in Figure 13.12. Aquifers are generally found in porous rock, such as sandstone. Water infiltrates the aquifer from the surface. The water that enters the aquifer is called recharge. 	top of an underground rock layer that is saturated with water	4.d
Most groundwater does not flow out of an aquifer as a spring or geyser. So to use the water thats stored in an aquifer people must go after it. How? They dig a well. A well is a hole that is dug or drilled through the ground down to an aquifer. This is illustrated in Figure 13.18. People have depended on water from wells for thousands of years. To bring water to the surface takes energy because the force of gravity must be overcome. Today, many wells use electricity to pump water to the surface. However, in some places, water is still brought to the surface the old-fashioned way  with human labor. The well pictured in Figure 13.19 is an example of this type of well. A hand-cranked pulley is used to lift the bucket of water to the surface. 	hole dug or drilled into the ground to reach an aquifer	5.e
Freshwater below Earths surface is called groundwater. The water infiltrates, or seeps down into, the ground from the surface. How does this happen? And where does the water go? 	fresh water below earths surface	6.b
An underground layer of rock that is saturated with groundwater is called an aquifer. A diagram of an aquifer is shown in Figure 13.12. Aquifers are generally found in porous rock, such as sandstone. Water infiltrates the aquifer from the surface. The water that enters the aquifer is called recharge. 	water that enters an aquifer	7.f
Oceans cover more than 70 percent of Earths surface and hold 97 percent of its surface water. Its no surprise that the oceans have a big influence on the planet. The oceans affect the atmosphere, climate, and living things. 	the oceans influence earths atmosphere	true
The oceans provide a home to many living things. In fact, a greater number of organisms lives in the oceans than on land. Coral reefs, like the one in Figure 14.4, have more diversity of life forms than almost anywhere else on Earth. 	fewer organisms live in the oceans than on the land	false
When Earth formed 4.6 billion years ago, it would not have been called the water planet. There were no oceans then. In fact, there was no liquid water at all. Early Earth was too hot for liquid water to exist. Earths early years were spent as molten rock and metal. 	early earth was too cold for liquid water to exist	false
Oceans are the major source of water vapor in the atmosphere. Sunlight heats water near the sea surface, as shown in Figure 14.3. As the water warms, some of it evaporates. The water vapor rises into the air, where it may form clouds and precipitation. Precipitation provides the freshwater needed by plants and other living things. Ocean water also absorbs gases from the atmosphere. The most important are oxygen and carbon dioxide. Oxygen is needed by living things in the oceans. Much of the carbon dioxide sinks to the bottom of the seas. Carbon dioxide is a major cause of global warming. By absorbing carbon dioxide, the oceans help control global warming. 	the dead sea is extremely saline due to high evaporation	true
Oceans cover more than 70 percent of Earths surface and hold 97 percent of its surface water. Its no surprise that the oceans have a big influence on the planet. The oceans affect the atmosphere, climate, and living things. 	oceans cover more than 70 percent of earths surface	true
When Earth formed 4.6 billion years ago, it would not have been called the water planet. There were no oceans then. In fact, there was no liquid water at all. Early Earth was too hot for liquid water to exist. Earths early years were spent as molten rock and metal. 	earths oceans have always had the same configuration	false
Coastal areas have a milder climate than inland areas. They are warmer in the winter and cooler in the summer. Thats because land near an ocean is influenced by the temperature of the oceans. The temperature of ocean water is moderate and stable. Why? There are two major reasons: 1. Water is much slower to warm up and cool down than land. As a result, oceans never get as hot or as cold as land. 2. Water flows through all the worlds oceans. Warm water from the equator mixes with cold water from the poles. The mixing of warm and cold water makes the water temperature moderate. Even inland temperatures are milder because of oceans. Without oceans, there would be much bigger temperature swings all over Earth. Temperatures might plunge hundreds of degrees below freezing in the winter. In the summer, lakes and seas might boil! Life as we know it could not exist on Earth without the oceans. 	coastal areas always have colder climates than inland areas	false
You know that ocean water is salty. But do you know why? How salty is it? 	ocean water is saltier than any other water on earths surface	true
You know that ocean water is salty. But do you know why? How salty is it? 	most nutrients in the ocean are washed in from the land	true
You know that ocean water is salty. But do you know why? How salty is it? 	the amount of salt in ocean water is the same everywhere on earth	false
You know that ocean water is salty. But do you know why? How salty is it? 	about 250 million years ago there was one world ocean known as pansea	false
Oceans cover more than 70 percent of Earths surface and hold 97 percent of its surface water. Its no surprise that the oceans have a big influence on the planet. The oceans affect the atmosphere, climate, and living things. 	the climate of inland areas is affected by oceans	true
There are three main ocean zones based on distance from shore. They are the intertidal zone, neritic zone, and oceanic zone. Distance from shore influences how many nutrients are in the water. Why? Most nutrients are washed into ocean water from land. Therefore, water closer to shore tends to have more nutrients. Living things need nutrients. So distance from shore also influences how many organisms live in the water. 	the water may be very deep in the neritic zone	false
There are three main ocean zones based on distance from shore. They are the intertidal zone, neritic zone, and oceanic zone. Distance from shore influences how many nutrients are in the water. Why? Most nutrients are washed into ocean water from land. Therefore, water closer to shore tends to have more nutrients. Living things need nutrients. So distance from shore also influences how many organisms live in the water. 	nutrients may be scarce in the oceanic zone	true
Oceans cover more than 70 percent of Earths surface and hold 97 percent of its surface water. Its no surprise that the oceans have a big influence on the planet. The oceans affect the atmosphere, climate, and living things. 	temperature and pressure increase as you go deeper below the oceans surface	false
You know that ocean water is salty. But do you know why? How salty is it? 	ocean zone that is closest to shore	1. c
You know that ocean water is salty. But do you know why? How salty is it? 	dissolved gas in ocean water	2.g
You know that ocean water is salty. But do you know why? How salty is it? 	open ocean beyond the continental shelf	3.e
You know that ocean water is salty. But do you know why? How salty is it? 	ocean zone on the ocean floor	4.b
You know that ocean water is salty. But do you know why? How salty is it? 	ocean zone where sunlight does not reach	5.a
You know that ocean water is salty. But do you know why? How salty is it? 	main salt in ocean water	6.f
You know that ocean water is salty. But do you know why? How salty is it? 	ocean zone that lies over the continental shelf	7.d
Figure 14.9 also shows how the size of waves is measured. The highest point of a wave is the crest. The lowest point is the trough. The vertical distance between a crest and a trough is the height of the wave. Wave height is also called amplitude. The horizontal distance between two crests is the wavelength. Both amplitude and wavelength are measures of wave size. The size of an ocean wave depends on how fast, over how great a distance, and how long the wind blows. The greater each of these factors is, the bigger a wave will be. Some of the biggest waves occur with hurricanes. A hurricane is a storm that forms over the ocean. Its winds may blow more than 150 miles per hour! The winds also travel over long distances and may last for many days. 	the highest point of a wave is its amplitude	false
Figure 14.9 also shows how the size of waves is measured. The highest point of a wave is the crest. The lowest point is the trough. The vertical distance between a crest and a trough is the height of the wave. Wave height is also called amplitude. The horizontal distance between two crests is the wavelength. Both amplitude and wavelength are measures of wave size. The size of an ocean wave depends on how fast, over how great a distance, and how long the wind blows. The greater each of these factors is, the bigger a wave will be. Some of the biggest waves occur with hurricanes. A hurricane is a storm that forms over the ocean. Its winds may blow more than 150 miles per hour! The winds also travel over long distances and may last for many days. 	wavelength is the difference between a crest and a trough	false
Figure 14.9 also shows how the size of waves is measured. The highest point of a wave is the crest. The lowest point is the trough. The vertical distance between a crest and a trough is the height of the wave. Wave height is also called amplitude. The horizontal distance between two crests is the wavelength. Both amplitude and wavelength are measures of wave size. The size of an ocean wave depends on how fast, over how great a distance, and how long the wind blows. The greater each of these factors is, the bigger a wave will be. Some of the biggest waves occur with hurricanes. A hurricane is a storm that forms over the ocean. Its winds may blow more than 150 miles per hour! The winds also travel over long distances and may last for many days. 	the biggest ocean waves occur with hurricanes	true
The Suns gravity also pulls on Earth and its oceans. Even though the Sun is much larger than the Moon, the pull of the Suns gravity is much less because the Sun is much farther away. The Suns gravity strengthens or weakens the Moons influence on tides. Figure 14.14 shows the position of the Moon relative to the Sun at different times during the month. The positions of the Moon and Sun relative to each other determines how the Sun affects tides. This creates spring tides or neap tides. Spring tides occur during the new moon and full moon. The Sun and Moon are in a straight line either on the same side of Earth or on opposite sides. Their gravitational pull combines to cause very high and very low tides. Spring tides have the greatest tidal range. Neap tides occur during the first and third quarters of the Moon. The Moon and Sun are at right angles to each other. Their gravity pulls on the oceans in different directions so the highs and lows are not as great. Neap tides have the smallest tidal range. This animation shows the effect of the Moon and Sun on the tides: 	the greatest cause of tides is the sun	false
Figure 14.10 shows what happens to waves near shore. As waves move into shallow water, they start to touch the bottom. The base of the waves drag and slow. Soon the waves slow down and pile up. They get steeper and unstable as the top moves faster than the base. When they reach the shore, the waves topple over and break. 	waves break on shore because the water is shallow	true
Figure 14.9 also shows how the size of waves is measured. The highest point of a wave is the crest. The lowest point is the trough. The vertical distance between a crest and a trough is the height of the wave. Wave height is also called amplitude. The horizontal distance between two crests is the wavelength. Both amplitude and wavelength are measures of wave size. The size of an ocean wave depends on how fast, over how great a distance, and how long the wind blows. The greater each of these factors is, the bigger a wave will be. Some of the biggest waves occur with hurricanes. A hurricane is a storm that forms over the ocean. Its winds may blow more than 150 miles per hour! The winds also travel over long distances and may last for many days. 	tides are waves high tide is the crest and low tide is the trough	true
Most ocean waves are caused by winds. A wave is the transfer of energy through matter. A wave that travels across miles of ocean is traveling energy, not water. Ocean waves transfer energy from wind through water. The energy of a wave may travel for thousands of miles. The water itself moves very little. Figure 14.9 shows how water molecules move when a wave goes by. 	all waves are caused by winds	false
Tides are daily changes in the level of ocean water. They occur all around the globe. High tides occur when the water reaches its highest level in a day. Low tides occur when the water reaches its lowest level in a day. Tides keep cycling from high to low and back again. In most places the water level rises and falls twice a day. So there are two high tides and two low tides approximately every 24 hours. In Figure 14.12, you can see the difference between high and low tides. This is called the tidal range. 	tides cause water levels to rise and fall once a day	false
Most ocean waves are caused by winds. A wave is the transfer of energy through matter. A wave that travels across miles of ocean is traveling energy, not water. Ocean waves transfer energy from wind through water. The energy of a wave may travel for thousands of miles. The water itself moves very little. Figure 14.9 shows how water molecules move when a wave goes by. 	a wave is a transfer of energy that initially began with wind	true
Tides are daily changes in the level of ocean water. They occur all around the globe. High tides occur when the water reaches its highest level in a day. Low tides occur when the water reaches its lowest level in a day. Tides keep cycling from high to low and back again. In most places the water level rises and falls twice a day. So there are two high tides and two low tides approximately every 24 hours. In Figure 14.12, you can see the difference between high and low tides. This is called the tidal range. 	the difference between high and low tides is the tidal range	true
Most ocean waves are caused by winds. A wave is the transfer of energy through matter. A wave that travels across miles of ocean is traveling energy, not water. Ocean waves transfer energy from wind through water. The energy of a wave may travel for thousands of miles. The water itself moves very little. Figure 14.9 shows how water molecules move when a wave goes by. 	the first sign of a tsunami is coming is high water moving fast across the ocean	false
Winds and surface currents tend to move from the hot equator north or south toward the much cooler poles. Thats because of differences in the temperature of air masses over Earths surface. But Earth is spinning on its axis underneath the wind and water as they move. The Earth rotates from west to east. As a result, winds and currents actually end up moving toward the northeast or southeast. This effect of Earths rotation on the direction of winds and currents is called the Coriolis effect. 	coriolis effect is caused by earths rotation	true
Figure 14.13 shows why tides occur. The main cause of tides is the pull of the Moons gravity on Earth. The pull is greatest on whatever is closest to the Moon. Although the gravity pulls the land, only the water can move. As a result: Water on the side of Earth facing the Moon is pulled hardest by the Moons gravity. This causes a bulge of water on that side of Earth. That bulge is a high tide. Earth itself is pulled harder by the Moons gravity than is the ocean on the side of Earth opposite the Moon. As a result, there is bulge of water on the opposite side of Earth. This creates another high tide. With water bulging on two sides of Earth, theres less water left in between. This creates low tides on the other two sides of the planet. 	the suns gravity is the main cause of earths tides	false
The Suns gravity also pulls on Earth and its oceans. Even though the Sun is much larger than the Moon, the pull of the Suns gravity is much less because the Sun is much farther away. The Suns gravity strengthens or weakens the Moons influence on tides. Figure 14.14 shows the position of the Moon relative to the Sun at different times during the month. The positions of the Moon and Sun relative to each other determines how the Sun affects tides. This creates spring tides or neap tides. Spring tides occur during the new moon and full moon. The Sun and Moon are in a straight line either on the same side of Earth or on opposite sides. Their gravitational pull combines to cause very high and very low tides. Spring tides have the greatest tidal range. Neap tides occur during the first and third quarters of the Moon. The Moon and Sun are at right angles to each other. Their gravity pulls on the oceans in different directions so the highs and lows are not as great. Neap tides have the smallest tidal range. This animation shows the effect of the Moon and Sun on the tides: 	spring tides occur when the sun and moon are in a straight line	true
Another way ocean water moves is in currents. A current is a stream of moving water that flows through the ocean. Surface currents are caused mainly by winds, but not the winds that blow and change each day. Surface currents are caused by the major wind belts that blow in the same direction all the time. The major surface currents are shown in Figure 14.15. They flow in a clockwise direction in the Northern Hemi- sphere. In the Southern Hemisphere, they flow in the opposite direction. 	the coriolis effect causes surface currents to flow diagonally across the ocean	true
Tides are daily changes in the level of ocean water. They occur all around the globe. High tides occur when the water reaches its highest level in a day. Low tides occur when the water reaches its lowest level in a day. Tides keep cycling from high to low and back again. In most places the water level rises and falls twice a day. So there are two high tides and two low tides approximately every 24 hours. In Figure 14.12, you can see the difference between high and low tides. This is called the tidal range. 	daily change in the level of ocean water	1.c
Another way ocean water moves is in currents. A current is a stream of moving water that flows through the ocean. Surface currents are caused mainly by winds, but not the winds that blow and change each day. Surface currents are caused by the major wind belts that blow in the same direction all the time. The major surface currents are shown in Figure 14.15. They flow in a clockwise direction in the Northern Hemi- sphere. In the Southern Hemisphere, they flow in the opposite direction. 	stream of moving water that flows through the ocean	2.g
Figure 14.13 shows why tides occur. The main cause of tides is the pull of the Moons gravity on Earth. The pull is greatest on whatever is closest to the Moon. Although the gravity pulls the land, only the water can move. As a result: Water on the side of Earth facing the Moon is pulled hardest by the Moons gravity. This causes a bulge of water on that side of Earth. That bulge is a high tide. Earth itself is pulled harder by the Moons gravity than is the ocean on the side of Earth opposite the Moon. As a result, there is bulge of water on the opposite side of Earth. This creates another high tide. With water bulging on two sides of Earth, theres less water left in between. This creates low tides on the other two sides of the planet. 	tide that occurs during the first or third quarter of the moon	3.b
Most ocean waves are caused by winds. A wave is the transfer of energy through matter. A wave that travels across miles of ocean is traveling energy, not water. Ocean waves transfer energy from wind through water. The energy of a wave may travel for thousands of miles. The water itself moves very little. Figure 14.9 shows how water molecules move when a wave goes by. 	transfer of energy through matter	4.e
Figure 14.13 shows why tides occur. The main cause of tides is the pull of the Moons gravity on Earth. The pull is greatest on whatever is closest to the Moon. Although the gravity pulls the land, only the water can move. As a result: Water on the side of Earth facing the Moon is pulled hardest by the Moons gravity. This causes a bulge of water on that side of Earth. That bulge is a high tide. Earth itself is pulled harder by the Moons gravity than is the ocean on the side of Earth opposite the Moon. As a result, there is bulge of water on the opposite side of Earth. This creates another high tide. With water bulging on two sides of Earth, theres less water left in between. This creates low tides on the other two sides of the planet. 	tide that occurs during a full moon or new moon	5.d
Sometimes deep ocean water rises to the surface. This is called upwelling. Figure 14.18 shows why it happens. Strong winds blow surface water away from shore. This allows deeper water to flow to the surface and take its place. When water comes up from the deep, it brings a lot of nutrients with it. Why is deep water so full of nutrients? Over time, dead organisms and other organic matter settle to the bottom water and collect. The nutrient-rich water that comes to the surface by upwelling supports many living things. 	movement of deep ocean water to the surface	6.a
Currents also flow deep below the surface of the ocean. Deep currents are caused by differences in density at the top and bottom. Density is defined as the amount of mass per unit of volume. More dense water takes up less space than less dense water. It has the same mass but less volume. Water that is more dense sinks. Less dense water rises. What can make water more dense? Water becomes more dense when it is colder and when it has more salt. In the North Atlantic Ocean, cold winds chill the water at the surface. Sea ice grows in this cold water, but ice is created from fresh water. The salt is left behind in the seawater. This cold, salty water is very dense, so it sinks to the bottom of the North Atlantic. Downwelling can take place in other places where surface water becomes very dense (see Figure 14.17). When water sinks it pushes deep water along at the bottom of the ocean. This water circulates through all of the ocean basins in deep currents. 	amount of mass per unit of volume	7.f
The ocean floor is rich in resources. The resources include both living and nonliving things. 	only a tiny fraction of the ocean floor has ever been studied	true
The ocean floor is rich in resources. The resources include both living and nonliving things. 	the tallest mountains on earth are located on the ocean floor	true
Scientists have learned a lot about the ocean floor. For example, they know that Earths tallest mountains and deepest canyons are on the ocean floor. The major features on the ocean floor are described below. They are also shown in Figure 14.22. The continental shelf is the ocean floor nearest the edges of continents. It has a a gentle slope. The water over the continental shelf is shallow. The continental slope lies between the continental shelf and the abyssal plain. It has a steep slope with a sharp drop to the deep ocean floor. The abyssal plain forms much of the floor under the open ocean. It lies from 3 to 6 kilometers (1.9 to 3.7 miles) below the surface. Much of it is flat. An oceanic trench is a deep canyon on the ocean floor. Trenches occur where one tectonic plate subducts under another. The deepest trench is the Mariana Trench in the Pacific Ocean. It plunges more than 11 kilometers (almost 7 miles) below sea level. A seamount is a volcanic mountain on the ocean floor. Seamounts that rise above the water surface are known as islands. There are many seamounts dotting the seafloor. The mid-ocean ridge is a mountain range that runs through all the worlds oceans. It is almost 64,000 kilometers (40,000 miles) long! It forms where tectonic plates pull apart. Magma erupts through the ocean floor to make new seafloor. The magma hardens to create the ridge. 	earths deepest canyon is the grand canyon in the american southwest	false
The ocean floor is rich in resources. The resources include both living and nonliving things. 	ocean water over the abyssal plain is shallow and warm	false
The ocean floor is rich in resources. The resources include both living and nonliving things. 	the deepest ocean trench is 3 kilometers below sea level	false
Scientists have learned a lot about the ocean floor. For example, they know that Earths tallest mountains and deepest canyons are on the ocean floor. The major features on the ocean floor are described below. They are also shown in Figure 14.22. The continental shelf is the ocean floor nearest the edges of continents. It has a a gentle slope. The water over the continental shelf is shallow. The continental slope lies between the continental shelf and the abyssal plain. It has a steep slope with a sharp drop to the deep ocean floor. The abyssal plain forms much of the floor under the open ocean. It lies from 3 to 6 kilometers (1.9 to 3.7 miles) below the surface. Much of it is flat. An oceanic trench is a deep canyon on the ocean floor. Trenches occur where one tectonic plate subducts under another. The deepest trench is the Mariana Trench in the Pacific Ocean. It plunges more than 11 kilometers (almost 7 miles) below sea level. A seamount is a volcanic mountain on the ocean floor. Seamounts that rise above the water surface are known as islands. There are many seamounts dotting the seafloor. The mid-ocean ridge is a mountain range that runs through all the worlds oceans. It is almost 64,000 kilometers (40,000 miles) long! It forms where tectonic plates pull apart. Magma erupts through the ocean floor to make new seafloor. The magma hardens to create the ridge. 	the midocean ridge is created by magma that cools and hardens	true
The ocean floor is rich in resources. The resources include both living and nonliving things. 	most of the ocean floor is too deep for organisms to live there	false
The ocean floor is rich in resources. The resources include both living and nonliving things. 	the only resources on or below the ocean floor are minerals such as manganese	false
The ocean floor is rich in resources. The resources include both living and nonliving things. 	oil rigs floating on the ocean extract petroleum from sea water	false
The ocean floor is rich in resources. The resources include both living and nonliving things. 	hot water escapes through vents in the ocean floor	true
The ocean floor is rich in resources. The resources include both living and nonliving things. 	volcanic mountain on the ocean floor	1.f
The ocean floor is rich in resources. The resources include both living and nonliving things. 	mostly flat part of the ocean floor under the open ocean	2.a
The ocean floor is rich in resources. The resources include both living and nonliving things. 	deep canyon on the ocean floor	3.e
The ocean floor is rich in resources. The resources include both living and nonliving things. 	part of the ocean floor that lies between the continental shelf and abyssal plain	4.c
Scientists have learned a lot about the ocean floor. For example, they know that Earths tallest mountains and deepest canyons are on the ocean floor. The major features on the ocean floor are described below. They are also shown in Figure 14.22. The continental shelf is the ocean floor nearest the edges of continents. It has a a gentle slope. The water over the continental shelf is shallow. The continental slope lies between the continental shelf and the abyssal plain. It has a steep slope with a sharp drop to the deep ocean floor. The abyssal plain forms much of the floor under the open ocean. It lies from 3 to 6 kilometers (1.9 to 3.7 miles) below the surface. Much of it is flat. An oceanic trench is a deep canyon on the ocean floor. Trenches occur where one tectonic plate subducts under another. The deepest trench is the Mariana Trench in the Pacific Ocean. It plunges more than 11 kilometers (almost 7 miles) below sea level. A seamount is a volcanic mountain on the ocean floor. Seamounts that rise above the water surface are known as islands. There are many seamounts dotting the seafloor. The mid-ocean ridge is a mountain range that runs through all the worlds oceans. It is almost 64,000 kilometers (40,000 miles) long! It forms where tectonic plates pull apart. Magma erupts through the ocean floor to make new seafloor. The magma hardens to create the ridge. 	mountain range that runs through all the worlds oceans	5.d
The ocean floor is rich in resources. The resources include both living and nonliving things. 	structure on the ocean floor formed by minerals from hot water	6.g
The ocean floor is rich in resources. The resources include both living and nonliving things. 	ocean floor near the edge of a continent	7.b
Nekton are living things that swim through the water. They may live at any depth, in the photic or aphotic zone. Most nekton are fish, although some are mammals. Fish have fins and streamlined bodies to help them swim. Fish also have gills to take oxygen from the water. Figure 14.26 shows examples of nekton. 	nekton must live in the photic zone	false
Plankton are living things that float in the water. Most plankton are too small to see with the unaided eye. Some examples are shown in Figure 14.25. Plankton are unable to move on their own. Ocean motions carry them along. There are two main types of plankton: 1. Phytoplankton are plant-like plankton. They make food by photosynthesis. They live in the photic zone. Most are algae. 2. Zooplankton are animal-like plankton. They feed on phytoplankton. They include tiny animals and fish larvae. 	zooplankton may include larvae of large animals	true
When you think of life in the ocean, do you think of fish? Actually, fish are not the most common life forms in the ocean. Plankton are the most common. Plankton make up one of three major groups of marine life. The other two groups are nekton and benthos. Figure 14.24 shows the three groups. 	plankton are organisms that can swim against the current	false
Figure 14.29 shows a marine food chain. Phytoplankton form the base of the food chain. Phytoplankton are the most important primary producers in the ocean. They use sunlight and nutrients to make food by photosynthesis. Small zooplankton consume phytoplankton. Larger organisms eat the small zooplankton. Larger predators eat these consumers. In an unusual relationship, some enormous whales depend on plankton for their food. They filter tremendous amounts of these tiny creatures out of the water. The bacteria that make food from chemicals are also primary producers. These organisms do not do photosynthesis since there is no light at the vents. They do something called chemosynthesis. They break down chemicals to make food. When marine organisms die, decomposers break them down. This returns their nutrients to the water. The nutrients can be used again to make food. Decomposers in the oceans include bacteria and worms. Many live on the ocean floor. Do you know why? 	there is no photosynthesis at deepsea vents because there is no light	true
When you think of life in the ocean, do you think of fish? Actually, fish are not the most common life forms in the ocean. Plankton are the most common. Plankton make up one of three major groups of marine life. The other two groups are nekton and benthos. Figure 14.24 shows the three groups. 	if an ocean plant can photosynthesize light must be available to the plant	true
When you think of life in the ocean, do you think of fish? Actually, fish are not the most common life forms in the ocean. Plankton are the most common. Plankton make up one of three major groups of marine life. The other two groups are nekton and benthos. Figure 14.24 shows the three groups. 	all marine organisms are adapted to life in salt water	true
When you think of life in the ocean, do you think of fish? Actually, fish are not the most common life forms in the ocean. Plankton are the most common. Plankton make up one of three major groups of marine life. The other two groups are nekton and benthos. Figure 14.24 shows the three groups. 	no marine organism can withstand the extreme water pressure at the bottom of the ocean	false
When you think of life in the ocean, do you think of fish? Actually, fish are not the most common life forms in the ocean. Plankton are the most common. Plankton make up one of three major groups of marine life. The other two groups are nekton and benthos. Figure 14.24 shows the three groups. 	fish are the most numerous life forms in the ocean	false
When you think of life in the ocean, do you think of fish? Actually, fish are not the most common life forms in the ocean. Plankton are the most common. Plankton make up one of three major groups of marine life. The other two groups are nekton and benthos. Figure 14.24 shows the three groups. 	plankton range in size from bacteria to whales	false
When you think of life in the ocean, do you think of fish? Actually, fish are not the most common life forms in the ocean. Plankton are the most common. Plankton make up one of three major groups of marine life. The other two groups are nekton and benthos. Figure 14.24 shows the three groups. 	plankton always remain in one place because they cannot swim	false
Plankton are living things that float in the water. Most plankton are too small to see with the unaided eye. Some examples are shown in Figure 14.25. Plankton are unable to move on their own. Ocean motions carry them along. There are two main types of plankton: 1. Phytoplankton are plant-like plankton. They make food by photosynthesis. They live in the photic zone. Most are algae. 2. Zooplankton are animal-like plankton. They feed on phytoplankton. They include tiny animals and fish larvae. 	zooplankton feed on phytoplankton	true
Nekton are living things that swim through the water. They may live at any depth, in the photic or aphotic zone. Most nekton are fish, although some are mammals. Fish have fins and streamlined bodies to help them swim. Fish also have gills to take oxygen from the water. Figure 14.26 shows examples of nekton. 	some nekton are mammals	true
Nekton are living things that swim through the water. They may live at any depth, in the photic or aphotic zone. Most nekton are fish, although some are mammals. Fish have fins and streamlined bodies to help them swim. Fish also have gills to take oxygen from the water. Figure 14.26 shows examples of nekton. 	fish swim with their fins and gills	false
Benthos are living things on the ocean floor. Many benthic organisms attach themselves to rocks and stay in one place. This protects them from crashing waves and other water movements. Some benthic organisms burrow into sediments for food or protection. Benthic animals may crawl over the ocean floor. Examples of benthos include clams and worms. Figure 14.27 shows two other examples. Some benthos live near vents on the deep ocean floor. Tubeworms are an example (see Figure 14.28). Scalding hot water pours out of the vents. The hot water contains chemicals that some specialized bacteria can use to make food. Tubeworms let the bacteria live inside them. The bacteria get protection and the tubeworms get some of the food. 	many benthic organisms attach themselves to rocks	true
When you think of life in the ocean, do you think of fish? Actually, fish are not the most common life forms in the ocean. Plankton are the most common. Plankton make up one of three major groups of marine life. The other two groups are nekton and benthos. Figure 14.24 shows the three groups. 	sea cucumbers live on the ocean floor	true
When you think of life in the ocean, do you think of fish? Actually, fish are not the most common life forms in the ocean. Plankton are the most common. Plankton make up one of three major groups of marine life. The other two groups are nekton and benthos. Figure 14.24 shows the three groups. 	marine organisms that swim	1.b
Plankton are living things that float in the water. Most plankton are too small to see with the unaided eye. Some examples are shown in Figure 14.25. Plankton are unable to move on their own. Ocean motions carry them along. There are two main types of plankton: 1. Phytoplankton are plant-like plankton. They make food by photosynthesis. They live in the photic zone. Most are algae. 2. Zooplankton are animal-like plankton. They feed on phytoplankton. They include tiny animals and fish larvae. 	example of zooplankton	2.g
When you think of life in the ocean, do you think of fish? Actually, fish are not the most common life forms in the ocean. Plankton are the most common. Plankton make up one of three major groups of marine life. The other two groups are nekton and benthos. Figure 14.24 shows the three groups. 	name for plantlike plankton	3.c
When you think of life in the ocean, do you think of fish? Actually, fish are not the most common life forms in the ocean. Plankton are the most common. Plankton make up one of three major groups of marine life. The other two groups are nekton and benthos. Figure 14.24 shows the three groups. 	name for animallike plankton	4.e
When you think of life in the ocean, do you think of fish? Actually, fish are not the most common life forms in the ocean. Plankton are the most common. Plankton make up one of three major groups of marine life. The other two groups are nekton and benthos. Figure 14.24 shows the three groups. 	general term for marine organisms that float on water	5.d
When you think of life in the ocean, do you think of fish? Actually, fish are not the most common life forms in the ocean. Plankton are the most common. Plankton make up one of three major groups of marine life. The other two groups are nekton and benthos. Figure 14.24 shows the three groups. 	organisms that live on the ocean floor	6.a
Plankton are living things that float in the water. Most plankton are too small to see with the unaided eye. Some examples are shown in Figure 14.25. Plankton are unable to move on their own. Ocean motions carry them along. There are two main types of plankton: 1. Phytoplankton are plant-like plankton. They make food by photosynthesis. They live in the photic zone. Most are algae. 2. Zooplankton are animal-like plankton. They feed on phytoplankton. They include tiny animals and fish larvae. 	example of phytoplankton	7.f
Energy can move from one place to another. It can travel through space or matter. Thats why you can feel the heat of a campfire and see its light. These forms of energy travel from the campfire to you. 	a campfire warms the campers sitting around it by conduction	false
Energy can move from one place to another. It can travel through space or matter. Thats why you can feel the heat of a campfire and see its light. These forms of energy travel from the campfire to you. 	energy can travel only through matter	false
Almost all energy on Earth comes from the Sun. The Suns energy heats the planet and the air around it. Sunlight also powers photosynthesis and life on Earth. 	most of the energy on earth comes from the sun	true
Energy from the Sun has a wide range of wavelengths. The total range of energy is called the electromagnetic spectrum. You can see it in Figure 15.8. Visible light is the only light that humans can see. Different wavelengths of visible light appear as different colors. Radio waves have the longest wavelengths. They also have the least amount of energy. Infrared light has wavelengths too long for humans to see, but we can feel them as heat. The atmosphere absorbs the infrared light. Ultraviolet (UV) light is in wavelengths too short for humans to see. The most energetic UV light is harmful to life. The atmosphere absorbs most of this UV light from the Sun. Gamma rays have the highest energy and they are the most damaging rays. Fortunately, gamma rays dont penetrate Earths atmosphere. 	the electromagnetic spectrum is the range of wavelengths of visible light	false
Energy can move from one place to another. It can travel through space or matter. Thats why you can feel the heat of a campfire and see its light. These forms of energy travel from the campfire to you. 	light with the most energy is infrared light	false
Energy from the Sun has a wide range of wavelengths. The total range of energy is called the electromagnetic spectrum. You can see it in Figure 15.8. Visible light is the only light that humans can see. Different wavelengths of visible light appear as different colors. Radio waves have the longest wavelengths. They also have the least amount of energy. Infrared light has wavelengths too long for humans to see, but we can feel them as heat. The atmosphere absorbs the infrared light. Ultraviolet (UV) light is in wavelengths too short for humans to see. The most energetic UV light is harmful to life. The atmosphere absorbs most of this UV light from the Sun. Gamma rays have the highest energy and they are the most damaging rays. Fortunately, gamma rays dont penetrate Earths atmosphere. 	gamma rays do not penetrate earths atmosphere	true
In conduction, heat is transferred from molecule to molecule by contact. Warmer molecules vibrate faster than cooler ones. They bump into the cooler molecules. When they do they transfer some of their energy. Conduction happens mainly in the lower atmosphere. Can you explain why? 	warmer molecules have more energy than cooler ones	true
In conduction, heat is transferred from molecule to molecule by contact. Warmer molecules vibrate faster than cooler ones. They bump into the cooler molecules. When they do they transfer some of their energy. Conduction happens mainly in the lower atmosphere. Can you explain why? 	conduction happens mainly in the upper atmosphere	false
Convection is the transfer of heat by a current. Convection happens in a liquid or a gas. Air near the ground is warmed by heat radiating from Earths surface. The warm air is less dense, so it rises. As it rises, it cools. The cool air is dense, so it sinks to the surface. This creates a convection current, like the one in Figure 15.9. Convection is the most important way that heat travels in the atmosphere. 	warm air always sinks to the surface in a convection current	false
Energy can move from one place to another. It can travel through space or matter. Thats why you can feel the heat of a campfire and see its light. These forms of energy travel from the campfire to you. 	the greenhouse effect causes more solar energy to reach earths surface	false
Heat and light are forms of energy. Other forms are chemical and electrical energy. Energy cant be created or destroyed. It can change form. For example, a piece of wood has chemical energy stored in its molecules. When the wood burns, the chemical energy changes to heat and light energy. 	energy cannot be created or destroyed	true
What explains all of these events? The answer can be summed up in one word: energy. Energy is defined as the ability to do work. Doing anything takes energy. A campfire obviously has energy. You can feel its heat and see its light. 	ability to do work	1.e
When sunlight heats Earths surface, some of the heat radiates back into the atmosphere. Some of this heat is absorbed by gases in the atmosphere. This is the greenhouse effect, and it helps to keep Earth warm. The greenhouse effect allows Earth to have temperatures that can support life. Gases that absorb heat in the atmosphere are called greenhouse gases. They include carbon dioxide and water vapor. Human actions have increased the levels of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. This is shown in Figure 15.11. The added gases have caused a greater greenhouse effect. How do you think this affects Earths temperature? 	two important greenhouse gases are carbon dioxide and water vapor	true
Energy can move from one place to another. It can travel through space or matter. Thats why you can feel the heat of a campfire and see its light. These forms of energy travel from the campfire to you. 	tiny packet of energy	2.d
Energy can move from one place to another. It can travel through space or matter. Thats why you can feel the heat of a campfire and see its light. These forms of energy travel from the campfire to you. 	transfer of energy by a current	3.b
Radiation is the transfer of energy by waves. Energy can travel as waves through air or empty space. The Suns energy travels through space by radiation. After sunlight heats the planets surface, some heat radiates back into the atmosphere. 	sunlight hits earth surface then heat travels by conduction back into the atmosphere	true
Radiation is the transfer of energy by waves. Energy can travel as waves through air or empty space. The Suns energy travels through space by radiation. After sunlight heats the planets surface, some heat radiates back into the atmosphere. 	transfer of energy by waves through air or empty space	4.a
Energy from the Sun has a wide range of wavelengths. The total range of energy is called the electromagnetic spectrum. You can see it in Figure 15.8. Visible light is the only light that humans can see. Different wavelengths of visible light appear as different colors. Radio waves have the longest wavelengths. They also have the least amount of energy. Infrared light has wavelengths too long for humans to see, but we can feel them as heat. The atmosphere absorbs the infrared light. Ultraviolet (UV) light is in wavelengths too short for humans to see. The most energetic UV light is harmful to life. The atmosphere absorbs most of this UV light from the Sun. Gamma rays have the highest energy and they are the most damaging rays. Fortunately, gamma rays dont penetrate Earths atmosphere. 	deep purple is part of the ultraviolet spectrum	false
Heat and light are forms of energy. Other forms are chemical and electrical energy. Energy cant be created or destroyed. It can change form. For example, a piece of wood has chemical energy stored in its molecules. When the wood burns, the chemical energy changes to heat and light energy. 	burning wood releases chemical energy	true
The Sun gives off energy in tiny packets called photons. Photons travel in waves. Figure 15.7 models a wave of light. Notice the wavelength in the figure. Waves with shorter wavelengths have more energy. 	light with wavelengths too long for humans to see	5.f
In conduction, heat is transferred from molecule to molecule by contact. Warmer molecules vibrate faster than cooler ones. They bump into the cooler molecules. When they do they transfer some of their energy. Conduction happens mainly in the lower atmosphere. Can you explain why? 	transfer of energy by direct contact between molecules	6.g
Energy from the Sun has a wide range of wavelengths. The total range of energy is called the electromagnetic spectrum. You can see it in Figure 15.8. Visible light is the only light that humans can see. Different wavelengths of visible light appear as different colors. Radio waves have the longest wavelengths. They also have the least amount of energy. Infrared light has wavelengths too long for humans to see, but we can feel them as heat. The atmosphere absorbs the infrared light. Ultraviolet (UV) light is in wavelengths too short for humans to see. The most energetic UV light is harmful to life. The atmosphere absorbs most of this UV light from the Sun. Gamma rays have the highest energy and they are the most damaging rays. Fortunately, gamma rays dont penetrate Earths atmosphere. 	light with wavelengths too short for humans to see	7.c
The stratosphere is the layer above the troposphere. The layer rises to about 50 kilometers (31 miles) above the surface. 	layer of the atmosphere above the troposphere	1.c
At the top of the stratosphere is a thin layer called the stratopause. It acts as a boundary between the stratosphere and the mesosphere. 	layer of the atmosphere above the mesosphere	2.d
At the top of the stratosphere is a thin layer called the stratopause. It acts as a boundary between the stratosphere and the mesosphere. 	boundary between the troposphere and stratosphere	3.f
The exosphere is the layer above the thermosphere. This is the top of the atmosphere. The exosphere has no real upper limit; it just gradually merges with outer space. Gas molecules are very far apart in this layer, but they are really hot. Earths gravity is so weak in the exosphere that gas molecules sometimes just float off into space. 	layer of the atmosphere above the thermosphere	4.a
At the top of the stratosphere is a thin layer called the stratopause. It acts as a boundary between the stratosphere and the mesosphere. 	boundary between the stratosphere and mesosphere	5.g
The troposphere is the lowest layer of the atmosphere. In it, temperature decreases with altitude. The troposphere gets some of its heat directly from the Sun. Most, however, comes from Earths surface. The surface is heated by the Sun and some of that heat radiates back into the air. This makes the temperature higher near the surface than at higher altitudes. 	lowest layer of the atmosphere	6. e
The stratosphere is the layer above the troposphere. The layer rises to about 50 kilometers (31 miles) above the surface. 	layer of the atmosphere above the stratosphere	7. b
The troposphere is the lowest layer of the atmosphere. In it, temperature decreases with altitude. The troposphere gets some of its heat directly from the Sun. Most, however, comes from Earths surface. The surface is heated by the Sun and some of that heat radiates back into the air. This makes the temperature higher near the surface than at higher altitudes. 	most of the heat in the troposphere comes directly from the sun	false
Air temperature changes as altitude increases. In some layers of the atmosphere, the temperature decreases. In other layers, it increases. You can see this in Figure 15.12. Refer to this figure as you read about the layers below. 	convection currents occur in all five layers of the atmosphere	false
There are very few gas molecules in the mesosphere. This means that there is little matter to absorb the Suns rays and heat the air. Most of the heat that enters the mesosphere comes from the stratosphere below. Thats why the mesosphere is warmest at the bottom. 	most of the heat that enters the mesosphere comes from the stratosphere	true
Did you ever see a meteor shower, like the one in Figure 15.15? Meteors burn as they fall through the mesosphere. The space rocks experience friction with the gas molecules. The friction makes the meteors get very hot. Many meteors burn up completely in the mesosphere. 	friction with gas molecules causes meteors to burn up in the atmosphere	true
The stratosphere is the layer above the troposphere. The layer rises to about 50 kilometers (31 miles) above the surface. 	the troposphere rises to about 50 kilometers above earths surface	false
There are very few gas molecules in the mesosphere. This means that there is little matter to absorb the Suns rays and heat the air. Most of the heat that enters the mesosphere comes from the stratosphere below. Thats why the mesosphere is warmest at the bottom. 	the top of the mesosphere is warmer than the bottom	false
Have you ever seen a brilliant light show in the night sky? Sometimes the ions in the thermosphere glow at night. Storms on the Sun energize the ions and make them light up. In the Northern Hemisphere, the lights are called the northern lights, or aurora borealis. In the Southern Hemisphere, they are called southern lights, or aurora australis. 	the aurora borealis occurs because of storms on earths surface	false
Temperature increases with altitude in the thermosphere. Surprisingly, it may be higher than 1000 C (1800 F) near the top of this layer! The Suns energy there is very strong. The molecules absorb the Suns energy and are heated up. But there are so very few gas molecules, that the air still feels very cold. Molecules in the thermosphere gain or lose electrons. They then become charged particles called ions. 	the thermosphere contains charged particles called ions	true
The exosphere is the layer above the thermosphere. This is the top of the atmosphere. The exosphere has no real upper limit; it just gradually merges with outer space. Gas molecules are very far apart in this layer, but they are really hot. Earths gravity is so weak in the exosphere that gas molecules sometimes just float off into space. 	the exosphere merges gradually with outer space	true
There are very few gas molecules in the mesosphere. This means that there is little matter to absorb the Suns rays and heat the air. Most of the heat that enters the mesosphere comes from the stratosphere below. Thats why the mesosphere is warmest at the bottom. 	gas molecules in the exosphere are extremely cold	false
Dry climates receive very little rainfall. They also have high rates of evaporation. This makes them even drier. The driest climates are deserts. Most occur between about 15 and 30 latitude. This is where dry air sinks to the surface in the global circulation cells. Deserts receive less than 25 centimeters (10 inches) of rain per year. They may be covered with sand dunes or be home to sparse but hardy plants (see Figure 17.11). With few clouds, deserts have hot days and cool nights. Other dry climates get a little more precipitation. They are called steppes. These regions have short grasses and low bushes (see Figure 17.11). Steppes occur at higher latitudes than deserts. They are dry because they are in continental interiors or rain shadows. 	driest of all climates	1.d
Major climate types are based on temperature and precipitation. These two factors determine what types of plants can grow in an area. Animals and other living things depend on plants. So each climate is associated with certain types of living things. A major type of climate and its living things make up a biome. As you read about the major climate types below, find them on the map in Figure 17.9. 	climate found at very high altitudes	2.a
Tropical climates are found around the equator. As youd expect, these climates have warm temperatures year round. Tropical climates may be very wet or wet and dry. Tropical wet climates occur at or very near the equator. They have high rainfall year round. Tropical rainforests grow in this type of climate. Tropical wet and dry climates occur between 5 and 20 latitude and receive less rainfall. Most of the rain falls in a single season. The rest of the year is dry. Few trees can withstand the long dry season, so the main plants are grasses (see Figure 17.10). 	climate that has short grasses and low bushes	3.f
Continental climates are found in inland areas. They are too far from oceans to experience the effects of ocean water. Continental climates are common between 40 and 70 north latitude. There are no continental climates in the Southern Hemisphere. Can you guess why? The southern continents at this latitude are too narrow. All of their inland areas are close enough to a coast to be affected by the ocean! Humid continental climates are found between 40 and 60 north latitude. The northeastern U.S. has this type of climate. Summers are warm to hot, and winters are cold. Precipitation is moderate, and it falls year round. Deciduous trees grow in this climate. They lose their leaves in the fall and grow new ones in the spring. Subarctic climates are found between 60 and 70 north latitude. Much of Canada and Alaska have this type of climate. Summers are cool and short. Winters are very cold and long. Little precipitation falls, and most of it falls during the summer. Conifer forests grow in this climate (see Figure 17.13). 	climate that has conifer forests	4.b
Major climate types are based on temperature and precipitation. These two factors determine what types of plants can grow in an area. Animals and other living things depend on plants. So each climate is associated with certain types of living things. A major type of climate and its living things make up a biome. As you read about the major climate types below, find them on the map in Figure 17.9. 	climate type that includes marine west coast climates	5.g
Major climate types are based on temperature and precipitation. These two factors determine what types of plants can grow in an area. Animals and other living things depend on plants. So each climate is associated with certain types of living things. A major type of climate and its living things make up a biome. As you read about the major climate types below, find them on the map in Figure 17.9. 	climate found on the coast of california	6.e
Major climate types are based on temperature and precipitation. These two factors determine what types of plants can grow in an area. Animals and other living things depend on plants. So each climate is associated with certain types of living things. A major type of climate and its living things make up a biome. As you read about the major climate types below, find them on the map in Figure 17.9. 	climate type that is found in inland areas of the northern hemisphere	7.c
Tropical climates are found around the equator. As youd expect, these climates have warm temperatures year round. Tropical climates may be very wet or wet and dry. Tropical wet climates occur at or very near the equator. They have high rainfall year round. Tropical rainforests grow in this type of climate. Tropical wet and dry climates occur between 5 and 20 latitude and receive less rainfall. Most of the rain falls in a single season. The rest of the year is dry. Few trees can withstand the long dry season, so the main plants are grasses (see Figure 17.10). 	right around the equator is the one latitude with no glaciers	false
A place might have a different climate than the major climate type around it. This is called a microclimate. Look at Figure 17.15. The south-facing side of the hill gets more direct sunlight than the north side of a hill. This gives the south side a warmer microclimate. A microclimate can be due to a place being deeper. Since cold air sinks, a depression in the land can be a lot colder than the land around it. 	a valley could have a different microclimate from a hillside because cold air sinks	true
Continental climates are found in inland areas. They are too far from oceans to experience the effects of ocean water. Continental climates are common between 40 and 70 north latitude. There are no continental climates in the Southern Hemisphere. Can you guess why? The southern continents at this latitude are too narrow. All of their inland areas are close enough to a coast to be affected by the ocean! Humid continental climates are found between 40 and 60 north latitude. The northeastern U.S. has this type of climate. Summers are warm to hot, and winters are cold. Precipitation is moderate, and it falls year round. Deciduous trees grow in this climate. They lose their leaves in the fall and grow new ones in the spring. Subarctic climates are found between 60 and 70 north latitude. Much of Canada and Alaska have this type of climate. Summers are cool and short. Winters are very cold and long. Little precipitation falls, and most of it falls during the summer. Conifer forests grow in this climate (see Figure 17.13). 	the southern hemisphere has no lands with a continental climate	true
Temperate climates have moderate temperatures. These climates vary in how much rain they get and when the rain falls. You can see different types of temperate climates in Figure 17.12. Mediterranean climates are found on the western coasts of continents. The latitudes are between 30 and 45. The coast of California has a Mediterranean climate. Temperatures are mild and rainfall is moderate. Most of the rain falls in the winter, and summers are dry. To make it through the dry summers, short woody plants are common. Marine west coast climates are also found on the western coasts of continents. They occur between 45 and 60 latitude. The coast of Washington State has this type of climate. Temperatures are mild and theres plenty of rainfall all year round. Dense fir forests grow in this climate. Humid subtropical climates are found on the eastern sides of continents between about 20 and 40 latitude. The southeastern U.S. has this type of climate. Summers are hot and humid, but winters are chilly. There is moderate rainfall throughout the year. Pine and oak forests grow in this climate. 	coastal california has a mediterranean climate with woody plants to survive dry summers	true
Major climate types are based on temperature and precipitation. These two factors determine what types of plants can grow in an area. Animals and other living things depend on plants. So each climate is associated with certain types of living things. A major type of climate and its living things make up a biome. As you read about the major climate types below, find them on the map in Figure 17.9. 	the sonoran desert has only a few sparse plants	false
Major climate types are based on temperature and precipitation. These two factors determine what types of plants can grow in an area. Animals and other living things depend on plants. So each climate is associated with certain types of living things. A major type of climate and its living things make up a biome. As you read about the major climate types below, find them on the map in Figure 17.9. 	each type of climate is associated with certain types of living things	true
Tropical climates are found around the equator. As youd expect, these climates have warm temperatures year round. Tropical climates may be very wet or wet and dry. Tropical wet climates occur at or very near the equator. They have high rainfall year round. Tropical rainforests grow in this type of climate. Tropical wet and dry climates occur between 5 and 20 latitude and receive less rainfall. Most of the rain falls in a single season. The rest of the year is dry. Few trees can withstand the long dry season, so the main plants are grasses (see Figure 17.10). 	all tropical climates have high rainfall year round	false
Tropical climates are found around the equator. As youd expect, these climates have warm temperatures year round. Tropical climates may be very wet or wet and dry. Tropical wet climates occur at or very near the equator. They have high rainfall year round. Tropical rainforests grow in this type of climate. Tropical wet and dry climates occur between 5 and 20 latitude and receive less rainfall. Most of the rain falls in a single season. The rest of the year is dry. Few trees can withstand the long dry season, so the main plants are grasses (see Figure 17.10). 	a desert is any area that receives less than 50 cm of rainfall per year	false
Dry climates receive very little rainfall. They also have high rates of evaporation. This makes them even drier. The driest climates are deserts. Most occur between about 15 and 30 latitude. This is where dry air sinks to the surface in the global circulation cells. Deserts receive less than 25 centimeters (10 inches) of rain per year. They may be covered with sand dunes or be home to sparse but hardy plants (see Figure 17.11). With few clouds, deserts have hot days and cool nights. Other dry climates get a little more precipitation. They are called steppes. These regions have short grasses and low bushes (see Figure 17.11). Steppes occur at higher latitudes than deserts. They are dry because they are in continental interiors or rain shadows. 	steppes are dry because they occur between 15 and 30 degrees latitude	false
Tropical climates are found around the equator. As youd expect, these climates have warm temperatures year round. Tropical climates may be very wet or wet and dry. Tropical wet climates occur at or very near the equator. They have high rainfall year round. Tropical rainforests grow in this type of climate. Tropical wet and dry climates occur between 5 and 20 latitude and receive less rainfall. Most of the rain falls in a single season. The rest of the year is dry. Few trees can withstand the long dry season, so the main plants are grasses (see Figure 17.10). 	temperate climates vary in the amount and timing of precipitation they receive	true
Major climate types are based on temperature and precipitation. These two factors determine what types of plants can grow in an area. Animals and other living things depend on plants. So each climate is associated with certain types of living things. A major type of climate and its living things make up a biome. As you read about the major climate types below, find them on the map in Figure 17.9. 	the southeastern united states has a mediterranean climate	false
Continental climates are found in inland areas. They are too far from oceans to experience the effects of ocean water. Continental climates are common between 40 and 70 north latitude. There are no continental climates in the Southern Hemisphere. Can you guess why? The southern continents at this latitude are too narrow. All of their inland areas are close enough to a coast to be affected by the ocean! Humid continental climates are found between 40 and 60 north latitude. The northeastern U.S. has this type of climate. Summers are warm to hot, and winters are cold. Precipitation is moderate, and it falls year round. Deciduous trees grow in this climate. They lose their leaves in the fall and grow new ones in the spring. Subarctic climates are found between 60 and 70 north latitude. Much of Canada and Alaska have this type of climate. Summers are cool and short. Winters are very cold and long. Little precipitation falls, and most of it falls during the summer. Conifer forests grow in this climate (see Figure 17.13). 	subarctic climates have low precipitation especially during the winter	true
Polar climates are found near the North and South Poles. They also occur on high mountains at lower latitudes. The summers are very cool, and the winters are frigid. Precipitation is very low because its so cold. You can see examples of polar climates in Figure 17.14. Polar tundra climates occur near the poles. Tundra climates have permafrost. Permafrost is layer of ground below the surface that is always frozen, even in the summer. Only small plants, such as mosses, can grow in this climate. Alpine tundra climates occur at high altitudes at any latitude. They are also called highland climates. These regions are very cold because they are so far above sea level. The alpine tundra climate is very similar to the polar tundra climate. Ice caps are areas covered with thick ice year round. Ice caps are found only in Greenland and Antarctica. Temperatures and precipitation are both very low. What little snow falls usually stays on the ground. It doesnt melt because its too cold. 	ice caps are found in alaska canada and greenland	false
Tropical climates are found around the equator. As youd expect, these climates have warm temperatures year round. Tropical climates may be very wet or wet and dry. Tropical wet climates occur at or very near the equator. They have high rainfall year round. Tropical rainforests grow in this type of climate. Tropical wet and dry climates occur between 5 and 20 latitude and receive less rainfall. Most of the rain falls in a single season. The rest of the year is dry. Few trees can withstand the long dry season, so the main plants are grasses (see Figure 17.10). 	tundra climates occur only near the poles	false
Continental climates are found in inland areas. They are too far from oceans to experience the effects of ocean water. Continental climates are common between 40 and 70 north latitude. There are no continental climates in the Southern Hemisphere. Can you guess why? The southern continents at this latitude are too narrow. All of their inland areas are close enough to a coast to be affected by the ocean! Humid continental climates are found between 40 and 60 north latitude. The northeastern U.S. has this type of climate. Summers are warm to hot, and winters are cold. Precipitation is moderate, and it falls year round. Deciduous trees grow in this climate. They lose their leaves in the fall and grow new ones in the spring. Subarctic climates are found between 60 and 70 north latitude. Much of Canada and Alaska have this type of climate. Summers are cool and short. Winters are very cold and long. Little precipitation falls, and most of it falls during the summer. Conifer forests grow in this climate (see Figure 17.13). 	continental climates include humid continental and humid subtropical climates	false
Earths climate has changed many times through Earths history. Its been both hotter and colder than it is today. 	small changes in temperature can make big changes in climate	true
Natural processes caused earlier climate changes. Human beings are the main cause of recent global warming. 	from o ce to 2010 ce average global temperature has gone straight up	false
Earths climate has changed many times through Earths history. Its been both hotter and colder than it is today. 	climate can change as continents shift position	true
Some scientists think that global warming is affecting the cycle of El Nio and La Nia. These short-term changes seem to be cycling faster now than in the past. They are also more extreme. 	global warming will cause weather to be more extreme	true
Natural processes caused earlier climate changes. Human beings are the main cause of recent global warming. 	all global warming projections show temperature rising during this century	true
Earths climate has changed many times through Earths history. Its been both hotter and colder than it is today. 	it takes large changes in earths climate to affect living things	false
Over much of Earths past, the climate was warmer than it is today. Picture in your mind dinosaurs roaming the land. Theyre probably doing it in a pretty warm climate! But ice ages also occurred many times in the past. An ice age is a period when temperatures are cooler than normal. This causes glaciers to spread to lower latitudes. Scientists think that ice ages occurred at least six times over the last billion years alone. How do scientists learn about Earths past climates? 	only one ice age occurred over the past billion years	false
The last major ice age took place in the Pleistocene. This epoch lasted from 2 million to 14,000 years ago. Earths temperature was only 5 C (9 F) cooler than it is today. But glaciers covered much of the Northern Hemisphere. In Figure 17.17, you can see how far south they went. Clearly, a small change in temperature can have a big impact on the planet. Humans lived during this ice age. 	in the pleistocene ice age earths temperature was 5 c cooler than it is today	true
The last major ice age took place in the Pleistocene. This epoch lasted from 2 million to 14,000 years ago. Earths temperature was only 5 C (9 F) cooler than it is today. But glaciers covered much of the Northern Hemisphere. In Figure 17.17, you can see how far south they went. Clearly, a small change in temperature can have a big impact on the planet. Humans lived during this ice age. 	during the last ice age glaciers covered much of north america	true
Over much of Earths past, the climate was warmer than it is today. Picture in your mind dinosaurs roaming the land. Theyre probably doing it in a pretty warm climate! But ice ages also occurred many times in the past. An ice age is a period when temperatures are cooler than normal. This causes glaciers to spread to lower latitudes. Scientists think that ice ages occurred at least six times over the last billion years alone. How do scientists learn about Earths past climates? 	temperatures were higher during the medieval warm period than they have been over the past decade	false
Several natural processes may affect Earths temperature. They range from sunspots to Earths wobble. Sunspots are storms on the Sun. When the number of sunspots is high, the Sun gives off more energy than usual. Still, there is little evidence for climate changing along with the sunspot cycle. Plate movements cause continents to drift closer to the poles or the equator. Ocean currents also shift when continents drift. All these changes can affect Earths temperature. Plate movements trigger volcanoes. A huge eruption could spew so much gas and ash into the air that little sunlight would reach the surface for months or years. This could lower Earths temperature. A large asteroid hitting Earth would throw a lot of dust into the air. This could block sunlight and cool the planet. Earth goes through regular changes in its position relative to the Sun. Its orbit changes slightly. Earth also wobbles on its axis of rotation. The planet also changes the tilt on its axis. These changes can affect Earths temperature. 	plate tectonics may cause ocean currents to shift	true
Earths climate has changed many times through Earths history. Its been both hotter and colder than it is today. 	an enormous volcanic eruption would increase earths temperature	false
Natural processes caused earlier climate changes. Human beings are the main cause of recent global warming. 	solar storms are the main cause of recent global warming	false
Recent global warming is due mainly to human actions. Burning fossil fuels adds carbon dioxide to the atmosphere. Carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas. Its one of several that human activities add to the atmosphere. An increase in greenhouse gases leads to greater greenhouse effect. The result is increased global warming. Figure 17.20 shows the increase in carbon dioxide since 1960. 	greenhouse gases block sunlight and cool the planet	false
Recent global warming is due mainly to human actions. Burning fossil fuels adds carbon dioxide to the atmosphere. Carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas. Its one of several that human activities add to the atmosphere. An increase in greenhouse gases leads to greater greenhouse effect. The result is increased global warming. Figure 17.20 shows the increase in carbon dioxide since 1960. 	the amount of carbon dioxide in the air has been increasing for many decades	true
Earths climate has changed many times through Earths history. Its been both hotter and colder than it is today. 	dramatic increase in earths temperature since the middle of the 1800s	1.d
Earths climate has changed many times through Earths history. Its been both hotter and colder than it is today. 	shortterm climate change in which the pacific ocean is warmer than usual	2.e
Earths climate has changed many times through Earths history. Its been both hotter and colder than it is today. 	slight increase in earths temperature that occurred about 1000 years ago	3.a
Earths climate has changed many times through Earths history. Its been both hotter and colder than it is today. 	period in earths history when temperatures were cooler than normal	4.c
Several natural processes may affect Earths temperature. They range from sunspots to Earths wobble. Sunspots are storms on the Sun. When the number of sunspots is high, the Sun gives off more energy than usual. Still, there is little evidence for climate changing along with the sunspot cycle. Plate movements cause continents to drift closer to the poles or the equator. Ocean currents also shift when continents drift. All these changes can affect Earths temperature. Plate movements trigger volcanoes. A huge eruption could spew so much gas and ash into the air that little sunlight would reach the surface for months or years. This could lower Earths temperature. A large asteroid hitting Earth would throw a lot of dust into the air. This could block sunlight and cool the planet. Earth goes through regular changes in its position relative to the Sun. Its orbit changes slightly. Earth also wobbles on its axis of rotation. The planet also changes the tilt on its axis. These changes can affect Earths temperature. 	movement of cold water from the bottom to the surface of the ocean	5.f
Since the Pleistocene, Earths temperature has risen. Figure 17.18 shows how it changed over just the last 1500 years. There were minor ups and downs. But each time, the anomaly (the difference from average temperature) was less than 1 C (1.8 F). Since the mid 1800s, Earth has warmed up quickly. Look at Figure 17.19. The 14 hottest years on record have all occurred since 1900. Eight of them have occurred since 1998! This is what is usually meant by global warming. 	difference from average temperature	6.g
Earths climate has changed many times through Earths history. Its been both hotter and colder than it is today. 	shortterm climate change in which the pacific ocean is cooler than usual	7.b
Producers such as plants or algae use carbon dioxide in the air to make food. The organisms combine carbon dioxide with water to make sugar. They store the sugar as starch. Both sugar and starch are carbohydrates. Consumers get carbon when they eat producers or other consumers. Carbon doesnt stop there. Living things get energy from food in a process called respiration. This releases carbon dioxide back into the atmosphere. The cycle then repeats. 	process in which living things obtain energy from food	1.b
Producers such as plants or algae use carbon dioxide in the air to make food. The organisms combine carbon dioxide with water to make sugar. They store the sugar as starch. Both sugar and starch are carbohydrates. Consumers get carbon when they eat producers or other consumers. Carbon doesnt stop there. Living things get energy from food in a process called respiration. This releases carbon dioxide back into the atmosphere. The cycle then repeats. 	carbon compound used by plants to make sugar	2.g
Living things also need nitrogen. Nitrogen is a key element in proteins. Like carbon, nitrogen cycles through ecosystems. You can see the nitrogen cycle in Figure 18.13. 	key element in proteins	3.e
Living things also need nitrogen. Nitrogen is a key element in proteins. Like carbon, nitrogen cycles through ecosystems. You can see the nitrogen cycle in Figure 18.13. 	process that releases nitrogen from organic remains	4.d
Air is about 78 percent nitrogen. Decomposers release nitrogen into the air from dead organisms and their wastes. However, producers such as plants cant use these forms of nitrogen. Nitrogen must combine with other elements before producers can use it. This is done by certain bacteria in the soil. Its called fixing nitrogen. 	process that changes nitrogen to a form that plants can use	5.f
Living things also need nitrogen. Nitrogen is a key element in proteins. Like carbon, nitrogen cycles through ecosystems. You can see the nitrogen cycle in Figure 18.13. 	element that is the basis of all life on earth	6.c
Living things also need nitrogen. Nitrogen is a key element in proteins. Like carbon, nitrogen cycles through ecosystems. You can see the nitrogen cycle in Figure 18.13. 	type of carbon compound that includes sugars and starches	7.a
Living things also need nitrogen. Nitrogen is a key element in proteins. Like carbon, nitrogen cycles through ecosystems. You can see the nitrogen cycle in Figure 18.13. 	carbon is an important part of organic material	true
Living things also need nitrogen. Nitrogen is a key element in proteins. Like carbon, nitrogen cycles through ecosystems. You can see the nitrogen cycle in Figure 18.13. 	when an organism decomposes its carbon is released back into the environment	true
Living things also need nitrogen. Nitrogen is a key element in proteins. Like carbon, nitrogen cycles through ecosystems. You can see the nitrogen cycle in Figure 18.13. 	carbon is only found in organic material	false
Living things also need nitrogen. Nitrogen is a key element in proteins. Like carbon, nitrogen cycles through ecosystems. You can see the nitrogen cycle in Figure 18.13. 	nitrogen is a nutrient so more is always better	false
Producers such as plants or algae use carbon dioxide in the air to make food. The organisms combine carbon dioxide with water to make sugar. They store the sugar as starch. Both sugar and starch are carbohydrates. Consumers get carbon when they eat producers or other consumers. Carbon doesnt stop there. Living things get energy from food in a process called respiration. This releases carbon dioxide back into the atmosphere. The cycle then repeats. 	algae create food energy from sunlight	true
In the carbon cycle, carbon moves through living and nonliving things. Carbon actually moves through two cycles that overlap. One cycle is mainly biotic; the other cycle is mainly abiotic. Both cycles are shown in Figure 18.11. 	the carbon cycle includes both living and nonliving things	true
In the carbon cycle, carbon moves through living and nonliving things. Carbon actually moves through two cycles that overlap. One cycle is mainly biotic; the other cycle is mainly abiotic. Both cycles are shown in Figure 18.11. 	carbon changes form as it moves through the carbon cycle	true
Carbon is an element. By itself, its a black solid. You can see a lump of carbon in Figure 18.10. Carbon is incredibly important because of what it makes when it combines with many other elements. Carbon can form a wide variety of substances. For example, in the air, carbon combines with oxygen to form the gas carbon dioxide. In living things, carbon combines with several other elements. For example, it may combine with nitrogen and 	volcanic eruptions release carbon dioxide into the air	true
Carbon from decaying organisms enters the ground. Some carbon is stored in the soil. Some carbon may be stored underground for millions of years. This will form fossil fuels. When volcanoes erupt, carbon from the mantle is released as carbon dioxide into the air. Producers take in the carbon dioxide to make food. Then the cycle repeats. The oceans also play an important role in the carbon cycle. Ocean water absorbs carbon dioxide from the air. In fact, the oceans contain 50 times more carbon than the atmosphere. Much of the carbon sinks to the bottom of the oceans, where it may stay for hundreds of years. 	the atmosphere contains more carbon than the oceans	false
Living things also need nitrogen. Nitrogen is a key element in proteins. Like carbon, nitrogen cycles through ecosystems. You can see the nitrogen cycle in Figure 18.13. 	carbon cycles very quickly through ocean water	false
Air is about 78 percent nitrogen. Decomposers release nitrogen into the air from dead organisms and their wastes. However, producers such as plants cant use these forms of nitrogen. Nitrogen must combine with other elements before producers can use it. This is done by certain bacteria in the soil. Its called fixing nitrogen. 	nitrogen is one of the most important nutrients needed by plants	true
Air is about 78 percent nitrogen. Decomposers release nitrogen into the air from dead organisms and their wastes. However, producers such as plants cant use these forms of nitrogen. Nitrogen must combine with other elements before producers can use it. This is done by certain bacteria in the soil. Its called fixing nitrogen. 	plants obtain nitrogen directly from the atmosphere	false
Nitrogen is one of the most important nutrients needed by plants. Thats why most plant fertilizers contain nitrogen. Adding fertilizer to soil allows more plants to grow. As a result, a given amount of land can produce more food. So far, so good. But what happens next? Rain dissolves fertilizer in the soil. Runoff carries it away. The fertilizer ends up in bodies of water, from ponds to oceans. The nitrogen is a fertilizer in the water bodies. Since there is a lot of nitrogen it causes algae to grow out of control. Figure 18.14 shows a pond covered with algae. Algae may use up so much oxygen in the water that nothing else can grow. Soon, even the algae die out. Decomposers break down the dead tissue and use up all the oxygen in the water. This creates a dead zone. A dead zone is an area in a body of water where nothing grows because there is too little oxygen. There is a large dead zone in the Gulf of Mexico. You can see it Figure 18.14. 	nitrogen in runoff that enters ponds kills algae and water plants	false
Producers such as plants or algae use carbon dioxide in the air to make food. The organisms combine carbon dioxide with water to make sugar. They store the sugar as starch. Both sugar and starch are carbohydrates. Consumers get carbon when they eat producers or other consumers. Carbon doesnt stop there. Living things get energy from food in a process called respiration. This releases carbon dioxide back into the atmosphere. The cycle then repeats. 	when algae use food for energy they release oxygen into the water	false
Nitrogen is one of the most important nutrients needed by plants. Thats why most plant fertilizers contain nitrogen. Adding fertilizer to soil allows more plants to grow. As a result, a given amount of land can produce more food. So far, so good. But what happens next? Rain dissolves fertilizer in the soil. Runoff carries it away. The fertilizer ends up in bodies of water, from ponds to oceans. The nitrogen is a fertilizer in the water bodies. Since there is a lot of nitrogen it causes algae to grow out of control. Figure 18.14 shows a pond covered with algae. Algae may use up so much oxygen in the water that nothing else can grow. Soon, even the algae die out. Decomposers break down the dead tissue and use up all the oxygen in the water. This creates a dead zone. A dead zone is an area in a body of water where nothing grows because there is too little oxygen. There is a large dead zone in the Gulf of Mexico. You can see it Figure 18.14. 	there is a large dead zone in the gulf of mexico	true
The population growth rate is how fast a population is growing. The letter r stands for the growth rate. The growth rate equals the number of new members added to the population in a year for each 100 members already in the population. The growth rate includes new members added to the population and old members removed from the population. Births add new members to the population. Deaths remove members from the population. The formula for population growth rate is: r = b - d, where b = birth rate (number of births in 1 year per 100 population members) d = death rate (number of deaths in 1 year per 100 population members) If the birth rate is greater than the death rate, r is positive. This means that the population is growing bigger. For example, if b = 10 and d = 8, r = 2. This means that the population is growing by 2 individuals per year for every 100 members of the population. This may not sound like much, but its a fairly high rate of growth. A population growing at this rate would double in size in just 35 years! If the birth rate is less than the death rate, r is negative. This means that the population is becoming smaller. What do you think might cause this to happen? 	the population growth rate equals the number of births in a year per 100 people	false
The growth of the human population has started to slow down. You can see this in Figure 18.21. It may stop growing by the mid 2000s. Scientists think that the human population will peak at about 9 billion people. What will need to change for the population to stop growing then? 	if the birth rate is less than the death rate then the population has a growth rate of zero	false
Figure 18.17 shows how the human population has grown. It grew very slowly for tens of thousands of years. Then, in the 1800s, something happened to change all that. The human population started to grow much faster. 	there is no limit on how large a population can grow	false
Figure 18.17 shows how the human population has grown. It grew very slowly for tens of thousands of years. Then, in the 1800s, something happened to change all that. The human population started to grow much faster. 	the human population started to grow rapidly in the 1800s	true
Figure 18.17 shows how the human population has grown. It grew very slowly for tens of thousands of years. Then, in the 1800s, something happened to change all that. The human population started to grow much faster. 	in the first phase of the demographic transition populations grew slowly	false
More recently, the death rate has fallen because of the availability of more food and medical advances: A green revolution began in the mid 1900s. New methods and products increased how much food could be grown. For example, chemicals were developed that killed weeds without harming crops. Pesticides were developed that killed pests that destroyed crops. Vaccinations were developed that could prevent many diseases (see Figure 18.19). Antibiotics were discov- ered that could cure most infections caused by bacteria. Together, these two advances saved countless lives. Today in many countries, death rates have gone down but birth rates remain high. This means that the population is growing. Figure 18.20 shows the growth rates of human populations all over the world. 	pesticides increase crop production by killing weed plants	false
The growth of the human population has started to slow down. You can see this in Figure 18.21. It may stop growing by the mid 2000s. Scientists think that the human population will peak at about 9 billion people. What will need to change for the population to stop growing then? 	human population growth rates are highest in the united states	false
Are 9 billion people the human carrying capacity? It looks that way in Figure 18.21. But some people think there are too many of us already. Thats because we are harming the environment. Supplying all those people with energy creates a lot of pollution. For example, huge oil spills have killed millions of living things. Burning fossil fuels pollutes the air. This also increases causes global warming. Fossil fuels and other resources are being used up. We may run out of oil by the mid 2000s. Many other resources will run out sooner or later. People are killing too many animals for food. For example, some of the best fishing grounds in the oceans have almost no fish left. People have destroyed many habitats. For example, theyve drained millions of acres of wetlands. Wetlands have a great diversity of species. As wetlands shrink, species go extinct. People have allowed alien or invasive species - species originally from a different area - to invade new habitats. Often, the aliens have no natural enemies in their new home. They may drive native species extinct. Figure People themselves are also affected by the large size of the human population. A minority of people use most of the worlds energy and other resources. Many other people lack resources. Many dont have enough to eat or live with 	we may run out of oil by the mid2000s	true
Are 9 billion people the human carrying capacity? It looks that way in Figure 18.21. But some people think there are too many of us already. Thats because we are harming the environment. Supplying all those people with energy creates a lot of pollution. For example, huge oil spills have killed millions of living things. Burning fossil fuels pollutes the air. This also increases causes global warming. Fossil fuels and other resources are being used up. We may run out of oil by the mid 2000s. Many other resources will run out sooner or later. People are killing too many animals for food. For example, some of the best fishing grounds in the oceans have almost no fish left. People have destroyed many habitats. For example, theyve drained millions of acres of wetlands. Wetlands have a great diversity of species. As wetlands shrink, species go extinct. People have allowed alien or invasive species - species originally from a different area - to invade new habitats. Often, the aliens have no natural enemies in their new home. They may drive native species extinct. Figure People themselves are also affected by the large size of the human population. A minority of people use most of the worlds energy and other resources. Many other people lack resources. Many dont have enough to eat or live with 	alien species can cause native species to go extinct	true
Is it possible for all the worlds people to live well and still protect the planet? Thats the aim of sustainable development. Its goals are to: 1. Distribute resources fairly. 2. Conserve resources so they wont run out. 3. Use resources in ways that wont harm ecosystems. A smaller human population may be part of the solution. Better use of resources is another part. For example, when forests are logged, new trees should be planted. Everyone can help in the effort. What will you do? 	some people think that sustainable development may require a smaller human population	true
The population growth rate is how fast a population is growing. The letter r stands for the growth rate. The growth rate equals the number of new members added to the population in a year for each 100 members already in the population. The growth rate includes new members added to the population and old members removed from the population. Births add new members to the population. Deaths remove members from the population. The formula for population growth rate is: r = b - d, where b = birth rate (number of births in 1 year per 100 population members) d = death rate (number of deaths in 1 year per 100 population members) If the birth rate is greater than the death rate, r is positive. This means that the population is growing bigger. For example, if b = 10 and d = 8, r = 2. This means that the population is growing by 2 individuals per year for every 100 members of the population. This may not sound like much, but its a fairly high rate of growth. A population growing at this rate would double in size in just 35 years! If the birth rate is less than the death rate, r is negative. This means that the population is becoming smaller. What do you think might cause this to happen? 	annual births minus deaths per 100 population members	1.d
More recently, the death rate has fallen because of the availability of more food and medical advances: A green revolution began in the mid 1900s. New methods and products increased how much food could be grown. For example, chemicals were developed that killed weeds without harming crops. Pesticides were developed that killed pests that destroyed crops. Vaccinations were developed that could prevent many diseases (see Figure 18.19). Antibiotics were discov- ered that could cure most infections caused by bacteria. Together, these two advances saved countless lives. Today in many countries, death rates have gone down but birth rates remain high. This means that the population is growing. Figure 18.20 shows the growth rates of human populations all over the world. 	drug that kills bacteria	2.f
A population cant keep growing bigger and bigger forever. Sooner or later, it will run out of things it needs. For a given species, there is a maximum population that can be supported by the environment. This maximum is called the carrying capacity. When a population gets close to the carrying capacity, it usually grows more slowly. You can see this in Figure 18.16. When the population reaches the carrying capacity, it stops growing. 	using resources in a way that gives everyone enough and protects the environment	3.g
The industrial revolution is what happened. The industrial revolution began in the late 1700s in Europe, North America, and a few other places. In these places, the human population grew faster. While there had always been a lot of births, the population grew because the death rate fell. It fell for several reasons: 1. New farm machines were invented. They increased the amount of food that could be produced. With more food, people were healthier and could live longer. 2. Steam engines and railroads were built. These machines could quickly carry food long distances. This made food shortages less likely. 3. Sanitation was improved. Sewers were dug to carry away human wastes (see Figure 18.18). This helped reduce the spread of disease. With better food and less chance of disease, the death rate fell. More children lived long enough to reach adulthood and have children of their own. As the death rate fell, the birth rate stayed high for a while. This caused rapid population growth. However, the birth rate in these countries has since fallen to a rate close to that of the low death rate. The result was slow population growth once again. These changes are called the demographic transition. 	substance that prevents a disease	4.b
A population cant keep growing bigger and bigger forever. Sooner or later, it will run out of things it needs. For a given species, there is a maximum population that can be supported by the environment. This maximum is called the carrying capacity. When a population gets close to the carrying capacity, it usually grows more slowly. You can see this in Figure 18.16. When the population reaches the carrying capacity, it stops growing. 	largest population that can be supported by the environment	5.c
More recently, the death rate has fallen because of the availability of more food and medical advances: A green revolution began in the mid 1900s. New methods and products increased how much food could be grown. For example, chemicals were developed that killed weeds without harming crops. Pesticides were developed that killed pests that destroyed crops. Vaccinations were developed that could prevent many diseases (see Figure 18.19). Antibiotics were discov- ered that could cure most infections caused by bacteria. Together, these two advances saved countless lives. Today in many countries, death rates have gone down but birth rates remain high. This means that the population is growing. Figure 18.20 shows the growth rates of human populations all over the world. 	change from high birth and death rates to low birth and death rates	6.e
More recently, the death rate has fallen because of the availability of more food and medical advances: A green revolution began in the mid 1900s. New methods and products increased how much food could be grown. For example, chemicals were developed that killed weeds without harming crops. Pesticides were developed that killed pests that destroyed crops. Vaccinations were developed that could prevent many diseases (see Figure 18.19). Antibiotics were discov- ered that could cure most infections caused by bacteria. Together, these two advances saved countless lives. Today in many countries, death rates have gone down but birth rates remain high. This means that the population is growing. Figure 18.20 shows the growth rates of human populations all over the world. 	increase in food production due to new products and methods	7.a
Love Canal gained worldwide attention in the late 1970s when the press started covering its story. The story is outlined below and illustrated in Figure 19.9. 	love canal is considered to be one of the worst environmental disasters of all time	true
Love Canal gained worldwide attention in the late 1970s when the press started covering its story. The story is outlined below and illustrated in Figure 19.9. 	the soil of love canal was contaminated with lead and mercury	true
The greatest source of hazardous waste is industry. Agriculture is another major source. Even households produce a lot of hazardous waste. 	the superfund act requires safe disposal of hazardous waste	true
The greatest source of hazardous waste is industry. Agriculture is another major source. Even households produce a lot of hazardous waste. 	all hazardous waste is corrosive and explosive	false
Cleaning products, lawn chemicals, paints, batteries, motor oil these are just some of the many hazardous materials that may be found in households. You might think that a household doesnt produce enough hazardous waste to worry about. But when you add up all the waste from all the households in a community, its a different story. A city of just 50,000 people might produce more than 40 tons of hazardous waste each year! Clearly, how households deal with hazardous waste matters. What can your family do? Reduce, reuse, recycle, or properly dispose of the wastes. 1. Reduce the amount of hazardous products you buy. For example, if you only need a quart of paint for a job, dont buy a gallon. 2. Use less hazardous products if you can. For example, clean windows with vinegar and water instead of toxic window cleaners. 3. Reuse products if its safe to do so. For example, paint thinner that has been used to clean paint brushes can be strained and reused. 4. Recycle whenever possible. For example, some service stations allow you to drop off used motor oil, car batteries, or tires for recycling. 5. Always properly dispose of hazardous waste. For example, let liquid waste evaporate before placing the container in the trash. Proper disposal depends on the waste. Many hazardous products have disposal guidelines on the label. Thats one reason why you should keep the products in their original containers. The labels also explain how to use the products safely. Follow the instructions to protect yourself and the environment. Most communities have centers for disposing of household hazardous waste (see Figure 19.11). Do you know how to dispose of hazardous waste in your community? 	electronic products contain toxic chemicals	true
The greatest source of hazardous waste is industry. Agriculture is another major source. Even households produce a lot of hazardous waste. 	agriculture produces very little hazardous waste	false
The greatest source of hazardous waste is industry. Agriculture is another major source. Even households produce a lot of hazardous waste. 	no hazardous wastes can be recycled safely	false
The greatest source of hazardous waste is industry. Agriculture is another major source. Even households produce a lot of hazardous waste. 	hazardous products should never be reused	false
Cleaning products, lawn chemicals, paints, batteries, motor oil these are just some of the many hazardous materials that may be found in households. You might think that a household doesnt produce enough hazardous waste to worry about. But when you add up all the waste from all the households in a community, its a different story. A city of just 50,000 people might produce more than 40 tons of hazardous waste each year! Clearly, how households deal with hazardous waste matters. What can your family do? Reduce, reuse, recycle, or properly dispose of the wastes. 1. Reduce the amount of hazardous products you buy. For example, if you only need a quart of paint for a job, dont buy a gallon. 2. Use less hazardous products if you can. For example, clean windows with vinegar and water instead of toxic window cleaners. 3. Reuse products if its safe to do so. For example, paint thinner that has been used to clean paint brushes can be strained and reused. 4. Recycle whenever possible. For example, some service stations allow you to drop off used motor oil, car batteries, or tires for recycling. 5. Always properly dispose of hazardous waste. For example, let liquid waste evaporate before placing the container in the trash. Proper disposal depends on the waste. Many hazardous products have disposal guidelines on the label. Thats one reason why you should keep the products in their original containers. The labels also explain how to use the products safely. Follow the instructions to protect yourself and the environment. Most communities have centers for disposing of household hazardous waste (see Figure 19.11). Do you know how to dispose of hazardous waste in your community? 	you should never put old batteries in the trash	true
The greatest source of hazardous waste is industry. Agriculture is another major source. Even households produce a lot of hazardous waste. 	most cities have centers for disposal of household hazardous waste	true
The greatest source of hazardous waste is industry. Agriculture is another major source. Even households produce a lot of hazardous waste. 	to dispose of liquid waste let it evaporate	true
Love Canal highlighted the problem of pollution by hazardous waste. Hazardous waste is any waste that is dangerous to the health of people or the environment. It may be dangerous because it is toxic, corrosive, flammable, or explosive. Toxic waste is poisonous. Toxic waste may cause cancer or birth defects in people. It may also harm other living things. Corrosive waste is highly reactive with other substances. Corrosive waste may cause burns or destroy other materials that it touches. Flammable waste can burn easily. It may also give off harmful fumes when it burns. Explosive waste is likely to explode. The risk of explosion may be greater if the waste is mixed with other substances. Table 19.1 shows some examples of hazardous waste. Look closely. Are any of these examples lurking around your home? Example Description Cars contain toxic fluids such as brake fluid. The fluids may also be corrosive and flammable. This photo shows one way the fluids can end up in the ground. Cars use gas and oil. These materials are toxic and flammable. They pollute the land when they leak or spill. Batteries contain toxic and corrosive materials. People often toss them in the trash, but they should be disposed of properly. Electronics, such as old computers, contain toxic chem- icals. They may be sent to landfills where the toxic materials end up in the ground. Medical waste can contain many hazards: Human body fluids may cause disease; old thermometers may contain toxic mercury; and pharmaceuticals may be toxic to people and other living things. Example Description Paints can be both toxic and flammable. Paints may spill on the ground or be thrown improperly in the trash. Chemicals are applied to farm fields and lawns. They include fertilizers, herbicides, and pesticides. Many of these chemicals are toxic to people and other animals. 	batteries contain toxic materials and should be disposed of properly	true
The greatest source of hazardous waste is industry. Agriculture is another major source. Even households produce a lot of hazardous waste. 	the superfund act requires companies to be responsible for hazardous chemicals that they put into the	true
Love Canal opened peoples eyes to toxic waste burial. They realized there must be other Love Canals all over the country. Thousands of contaminated sites were found. The Superfund Act was passed in 1980. The law required that money be set aside for cleanup of toxic waste sites, like the Elizabeth Copper Mine in Vermont (see the far-right image in Figure 19.9). The law also required safer disposal of hazardous waste in the future. 	pesticides in any amount are not toxic to humans	false
Love Canal opened peoples eyes to toxic waste burial. They realized there must be other Love Canals all over the country. Thousands of contaminated sites were found. The Superfund Act was passed in 1980. The law required that money be set aside for cleanup of toxic waste sites, like the Elizabeth Copper Mine in Vermont (see the far-right image in Figure 19.9). The law also required safer disposal of hazardous waste in the future. 	toxic wastes can be located because they are always visible	false
Love Canal highlighted the problem of pollution by hazardous waste. Hazardous waste is any waste that is dangerous to the health of people or the environment. It may be dangerous because it is toxic, corrosive, flammable, or explosive. Toxic waste is poisonous. Toxic waste may cause cancer or birth defects in people. It may also harm other living things. Corrosive waste is highly reactive with other substances. Corrosive waste may cause burns or destroy other materials that it touches. Flammable waste can burn easily. It may also give off harmful fumes when it burns. Explosive waste is likely to explode. The risk of explosion may be greater if the waste is mixed with other substances. Table 19.1 shows some examples of hazardous waste. Look closely. Are any of these examples lurking around your home? Example Description Cars contain toxic fluids such as brake fluid. The fluids may also be corrosive and flammable. This photo shows one way the fluids can end up in the ground. Cars use gas and oil. These materials are toxic and flammable. They pollute the land when they leak or spill. Batteries contain toxic and corrosive materials. People often toss them in the trash, but they should be disposed of properly. Electronics, such as old computers, contain toxic chem- icals. They may be sent to landfills where the toxic materials end up in the ground. Medical waste can contain many hazards: Human body fluids may cause disease; old thermometers may contain toxic mercury; and pharmaceuticals may be toxic to people and other living things. Example Description Paints can be both toxic and flammable. Paints may spill on the ground or be thrown improperly in the trash. Chemicals are applied to farm fields and lawns. They include fertilizers, herbicides, and pesticides. Many of these chemicals are toxic to people and other animals. 	highly reactive with other substances	1.c
The greatest source of hazardous waste is industry. Agriculture is another major source. Even households produce a lot of hazardous waste. 	any waste that is dangerous to people or the environment	2.b
Love Canal highlighted the problem of pollution by hazardous waste. Hazardous waste is any waste that is dangerous to the health of people or the environment. It may be dangerous because it is toxic, corrosive, flammable, or explosive. Toxic waste is poisonous. Toxic waste may cause cancer or birth defects in people. It may also harm other living things. Corrosive waste is highly reactive with other substances. Corrosive waste may cause burns or destroy other materials that it touches. Flammable waste can burn easily. It may also give off harmful fumes when it burns. Explosive waste is likely to explode. The risk of explosion may be greater if the waste is mixed with other substances. Table 19.1 shows some examples of hazardous waste. Look closely. Are any of these examples lurking around your home? Example Description Cars contain toxic fluids such as brake fluid. The fluids may also be corrosive and flammable. This photo shows one way the fluids can end up in the ground. Cars use gas and oil. These materials are toxic and flammable. They pollute the land when they leak or spill. Batteries contain toxic and corrosive materials. People often toss them in the trash, but they should be disposed of properly. Electronics, such as old computers, contain toxic chem- icals. They may be sent to landfills where the toxic materials end up in the ground. Medical waste can contain many hazards: Human body fluids may cause disease; old thermometers may contain toxic mercury; and pharmaceuticals may be toxic to people and other living things. Example Description Paints can be both toxic and flammable. Paints may spill on the ground or be thrown improperly in the trash. Chemicals are applied to farm fields and lawns. They include fertilizers, herbicides, and pesticides. Many of these chemicals are toxic to people and other animals. 	able to burn easily	3.d
Thanks to the lessons of Love Canal, the U.S. now has laws requiring the safe disposal of hazardous waste. Companies must ensure that hazardous waste is not allowed to enter the environment in dangerous amounts. They must also protect their workers from hazardous materials. For example, they must provide employees with the proper safety gear and training (see Figure 19.10). 	act of contaminating the environment	4.e
Love Canal opened peoples eyes to toxic waste burial. They realized there must be other Love Canals all over the country. Thousands of contaminated sites were found. The Superfund Act was passed in 1980. The law required that money be set aside for cleanup of toxic waste sites, like the Elizabeth Copper Mine in Vermont (see the far-right image in Figure 19.9). The law also required safer disposal of hazardous waste in the future. 	law requiring that money be set aside to clean up toxic waste sites	5.a
When an object is moving, it is not enough to describe its location. We also need to know direction. Direction is important for describing moving objects. For example, a wind blows a storm over your school. Where is that storm coming from? Where is it going? The most common way to describe direction is by using a compass. A compass is a device with a floating needle (Figure 2.1). The needle is a small magnet that aligns itself with the Earths magnetic field. The compass needle always points to magnetic north. If you have a compass and you find north, you can then know any other direction. See the directions, such as east, south, west, etc., on a compass rose. A compass needle lines up with Earths magnetic north pole. This is different from Earths geographic north pole, or true north. The geographic north pole is the top of the imaginary axis around which Earth rotates. The geographic north pole is much like the spindle of a spinning top. The location of the geographic north pole does not change. However, the magnetic north pole shifts in location over time. Depending on where you live, you can correct for the difference between the two poles when you use a map and a compass (Figure 2.2). Some maps have a double compass rose. This allows users to make the corrections between magnetic north and true north. An example is a nautical chart that boaters use to chart their positions at sea (Figure 2.3). 	earths magnetic north pole is always located in the same place	false
When an object is moving, it is not enough to describe its location. We also need to know direction. Direction is important for describing moving objects. For example, a wind blows a storm over your school. Where is that storm coming from? Where is it going? The most common way to describe direction is by using a compass. A compass is a device with a floating needle (Figure 2.1). The needle is a small magnet that aligns itself with the Earths magnetic field. The compass needle always points to magnetic north. If you have a compass and you find north, you can then know any other direction. See the directions, such as east, south, west, etc., on a compass rose. A compass needle lines up with Earths magnetic north pole. This is different from Earths geographic north pole, or true north. The geographic north pole is the top of the imaginary axis around which Earth rotates. The geographic north pole is much like the spindle of a spinning top. The location of the geographic north pole does not change. However, the magnetic north pole shifts in location over time. Depending on where you live, you can correct for the difference between the two poles when you use a map and a compass (Figure 2.2). Some maps have a double compass rose. This allows users to make the corrections between magnetic north and true north. An example is a nautical chart that boaters use to chart their positions at sea (Figure 2.3). 	a compass needle points toward earths true north	false
If you take away the water in the oceans (Figure 2.6), Earth looks really different. You see that the surface has two main features: continents and ocean basins. Continents are large land areas. Ocean basins extend from the edges of continents to the ocean floor and into deep trenches. Continents are much older than ocean basins. Some rocks on the continents are billions of years old. Ocean basins are only millions of years old at their oldest. Because the continents are so old, a lot has happened to them! As we view the land around us we see landforms. Landforms are physical features on Earths surface. Landforms are introduced in this section but will be discussed more in later chapters. Constructive forces cause landforms to grow. Lava flowing into the ocean can build land outward. A volcano can be a constructive force. Destructive forces may blow landforms apart. A volcano blowing its top off is a destructive force. The destructive forces of weathering and erosion change landforms more slowly. Over millions of years, mountains are worn down by rivers and streams. Constructive and destructive forces work together to create landforms. Constructive forces create mountains and erosion may wear them away. Mountains are very large landforms. Mountains may wear away into a high flat area called a plateau, or a lower-lying plain. Interior plains are in the middle of continents. Coastal plains are on the edge of a continent, where it meets the ocean. Rivers and streams flow across continents. They cut away at rock, forming river valleys (Figure 2.8). These are 	all landforms are created by constructive forces	false
If you take away the water in the oceans (Figure 2.6), Earth looks really different. You see that the surface has two main features: continents and ocean basins. Continents are large land areas. Ocean basins extend from the edges of continents to the ocean floor and into deep trenches. Continents are much older than ocean basins. Some rocks on the continents are billions of years old. Ocean basins are only millions of years old at their oldest. Because the continents are so old, a lot has happened to them! As we view the land around us we see landforms. Landforms are physical features on Earths surface. Landforms are introduced in this section but will be discussed more in later chapters. Constructive forces cause landforms to grow. Lava flowing into the ocean can build land outward. A volcano can be a constructive force. Destructive forces may blow landforms apart. A volcano blowing its top off is a destructive force. The destructive forces of weathering and erosion change landforms more slowly. Over millions of years, mountains are worn down by rivers and streams. Constructive and destructive forces work together to create landforms. Constructive forces create mountains and erosion may wear them away. Mountains are very large landforms. Mountains may wear away into a high flat area called a plateau, or a lower-lying plain. Interior plains are in the middle of continents. Coastal plains are on the edge of a continent, where it meets the ocean. Rivers and streams flow across continents. They cut away at rock, forming river valleys (Figure 2.8). These are 	a mountain may wear away into a high flat area called a plateau	true
As you know, the surface of Earth is not flat. Some places are high and some places are low. For example, mountain ranges like the Sierra Nevada in California or the Andes in South America are high above the surrounding areas. We can describe the topography of a region by measuring the height or depth of that feature relative to sea level (Figure mountains, while others are more like small hills! Relief, or terrain, includes all the landforms of a region. A topographic map shows the height, or elevation, of features in an area. This includes mountains, craters, valleys, and rivers. For example, Figure 2.5 shows the San Francisco Peaks in northern Arizona. Features on the map include mountains, hills and lava flows. You can recognize these features from the differences in elevation. We will talk about some different landforms in the next section. 	examples of landforms include hills straits and capes	true
The ocean basin begins where the ocean meets the land. The continental margin begins at the shore and goes down to the ocean floor. It includes the continental shelf, slope, and rise. The continental shelf is part of the continent, but it is underwater today. It is about 100-200 meters deep, much shallower than the rest of the ocean. The continental shelf usually goes out about 100 to 200 kilometers from the shore (Figure 2.9). The continental slope is the slope that forms the edge of the continent. It is seaward of the continental shelf. In some places, a large pile of sediments brought from rivers creates the continental rise. The continental rise ends at the Besides seamounts, there are long, very tall (about 2 km) mountain ranges. These ranges are connected so that they form huge ridge systems called mid-ocean ridges (Figure 2.11). The mid-ocean ridges form from volcanic eruptions. Lava from inside Earth breaks through the crust and creates the mountains. The deepest places of the ocean are the ocean trenches. Many trenches line the edges of the Pacific Ocean. The Mariana Trench is the deepest place in the ocean. (Figure 2.12). At about 11 km deep, it is the deepest place on Earth! To compare, the tallest place on Earth, Mount Everest, is less than 9 km tall. 	the ocean basin begins where the ocean meets the land	true
The ocean basin begins where the ocean meets the land. The continental margin begins at the shore and goes down to the ocean floor. It includes the continental shelf, slope, and rise. The continental shelf is part of the continent, but it is underwater today. It is about 100-200 meters deep, much shallower than the rest of the ocean. The continental shelf usually goes out about 100 to 200 kilometers from the shore (Figure 2.9). The continental slope is the slope that forms the edge of the continent. It is seaward of the continental shelf. In some places, a large pile of sediments brought from rivers creates the continental rise. The continental rise ends at the Besides seamounts, there are long, very tall (about 2 km) mountain ranges. These ranges are connected so that they form huge ridge systems called mid-ocean ridges (Figure 2.11). The mid-ocean ridges form from volcanic eruptions. Lava from inside Earth breaks through the crust and creates the mountains. The deepest places of the ocean are the ocean trenches. Many trenches line the edges of the Pacific Ocean. The Mariana Trench is the deepest place in the ocean. (Figure 2.12). At about 11 km deep, it is the deepest place on Earth! To compare, the tallest place on Earth, Mount Everest, is less than 9 km tall. 	the continental shelf is the part of a continent that is under ocean water	true
The ocean basin begins where the ocean meets the land. The continental margin begins at the shore and goes down to the ocean floor. It includes the continental shelf, slope, and rise. The continental shelf is part of the continent, but it is underwater today. It is about 100-200 meters deep, much shallower than the rest of the ocean. The continental shelf usually goes out about 100 to 200 kilometers from the shore (Figure 2.9). The continental slope is the slope that forms the edge of the continent. It is seaward of the continental shelf. In some places, a large pile of sediments brought from rivers creates the continental rise. The continental rise ends at the Besides seamounts, there are long, very tall (about 2 km) mountain ranges. These ranges are connected so that they form huge ridge systems called mid-ocean ridges (Figure 2.11). The mid-ocean ridges form from volcanic eruptions. Lava from inside Earth breaks through the crust and creates the mountains. The deepest places of the ocean are the ocean trenches. Many trenches line the edges of the Pacific Ocean. The Mariana Trench is the deepest place in the ocean. (Figure 2.12). At about 11 km deep, it is the deepest place on Earth! To compare, the tallest place on Earth, Mount Everest, is less than 9 km tall. 	the continental rise is formed by volcanic eruptions	false
The ocean basin begins where the ocean meets the land. The continental margin begins at the shore and goes down to the ocean floor. It includes the continental shelf, slope, and rise. The continental shelf is part of the continent, but it is underwater today. It is about 100-200 meters deep, much shallower than the rest of the ocean. The continental shelf usually goes out about 100 to 200 kilometers from the shore (Figure 2.9). The continental slope is the slope that forms the edge of the continent. It is seaward of the continental shelf. In some places, a large pile of sediments brought from rivers creates the continental rise. The continental rise ends at the Besides seamounts, there are long, very tall (about 2 km) mountain ranges. These ranges are connected so that they form huge ridge systems called mid-ocean ridges (Figure 2.11). The mid-ocean ridges form from volcanic eruptions. Lava from inside Earth breaks through the crust and creates the mountains. The deepest places of the ocean are the ocean trenches. Many trenches line the edges of the Pacific Ocean. The Mariana Trench is the deepest place in the ocean. (Figure 2.12). At about 11 km deep, it is the deepest place on Earth! To compare, the tallest place on Earth, Mount Everest, is less than 9 km tall. 	midocean ridges form from sediments deposited by ocean water	false
The ocean basin begins where the ocean meets the land. The continental margin begins at the shore and goes down to the ocean floor. It includes the continental shelf, slope, and rise. The continental shelf is part of the continent, but it is underwater today. It is about 100-200 meters deep, much shallower than the rest of the ocean. The continental shelf usually goes out about 100 to 200 kilometers from the shore (Figure 2.9). The continental slope is the slope that forms the edge of the continent. It is seaward of the continental shelf. In some places, a large pile of sediments brought from rivers creates the continental rise. The continental rise ends at the Besides seamounts, there are long, very tall (about 2 km) mountain ranges. These ranges are connected so that they form huge ridge systems called mid-ocean ridges (Figure 2.11). The mid-ocean ridges form from volcanic eruptions. Lava from inside Earth breaks through the crust and creates the mountains. The deepest places of the ocean are the ocean trenches. Many trenches line the edges of the Pacific Ocean. The Mariana Trench is the deepest place in the ocean. (Figure 2.12). At about 11 km deep, it is the deepest place on Earth! To compare, the tallest place on Earth, Mount Everest, is less than 9 km tall. 	the mariana trench is the deepest place on earth	true
To describe your location wherever you are on Earths surface, you could use a coordinate system. For example, you could say that you are at 1234 Main Street, Springfield, Ohio. Or you could use a point of reference. If you want to meet up with a friend, you could tell him the distance and direction you are from the reference point. An example is, I am at the corner of Maple Street and Main Street, about two blocks north of your apartment. When studying Earths surface, scientists must be able to pinpoint a feature they are interested in. Scientists and others have a system to describe the location of any feature. Usually they use latitude and longitude as a coordinate system. Lines of latitude and longitude form a grid. The grid is centered on a reference point. You will learn about this type of grid when we discuss maps later in this chapter. 	latitude and longitude can describe direction	false
As you know, the surface of Earth is not flat. Some places are high and some places are low. For example, mountain ranges like the Sierra Nevada in California or the Andes in South America are high above the surrounding areas. We can describe the topography of a region by measuring the height or depth of that feature relative to sea level (Figure mountains, while others are more like small hills! Relief, or terrain, includes all the landforms of a region. A topographic map shows the height, or elevation, of features in an area. This includes mountains, craters, valleys, and rivers. For example, Figure 2.5 shows the San Francisco Peaks in northern Arizona. Features on the map include mountains, hills and lava flows. You can recognize these features from the differences in elevation. We will talk about some different landforms in the next section. 	elevation describes how far above sea level an object is	true
If you take away the water in the oceans (Figure 2.6), Earth looks really different. You see that the surface has two main features: continents and ocean basins. Continents are large land areas. Ocean basins extend from the edges of continents to the ocean floor and into deep trenches. Continents are much older than ocean basins. Some rocks on the continents are billions of years old. Ocean basins are only millions of years old at their oldest. Because the continents are so old, a lot has happened to them! As we view the land around us we see landforms. Landforms are physical features on Earths surface. Landforms are introduced in this section but will be discussed more in later chapters. Constructive forces cause landforms to grow. Lava flowing into the ocean can build land outward. A volcano can be a constructive force. Destructive forces may blow landforms apart. A volcano blowing its top off is a destructive force. The destructive forces of weathering and erosion change landforms more slowly. Over millions of years, mountains are worn down by rivers and streams. Constructive and destructive forces work together to create landforms. Constructive forces create mountains and erosion may wear them away. Mountains are very large landforms. Mountains may wear away into a high flat area called a plateau, or a lower-lying plain. Interior plains are in the middle of continents. Coastal plains are on the edge of a continent, where it meets the ocean. Rivers and streams flow across continents. They cut away at rock, forming river valleys (Figure 2.8). These are 	continents can be billions of years old	true
The ocean basin begins where the ocean meets the land. The continental margin begins at the shore and goes down to the ocean floor. It includes the continental shelf, slope, and rise. The continental shelf is part of the continent, but it is underwater today. It is about 100-200 meters deep, much shallower than the rest of the ocean. The continental shelf usually goes out about 100 to 200 kilometers from the shore (Figure 2.9). The continental slope is the slope that forms the edge of the continent. It is seaward of the continental shelf. In some places, a large pile of sediments brought from rivers creates the continental rise. The continental rise ends at the Besides seamounts, there are long, very tall (about 2 km) mountain ranges. These ranges are connected so that they form huge ridge systems called mid-ocean ridges (Figure 2.11). The mid-ocean ridges form from volcanic eruptions. Lava from inside Earth breaks through the crust and creates the mountains. The deepest places of the ocean are the ocean trenches. Many trenches line the edges of the Pacific Ocean. The Mariana Trench is the deepest place in the ocean. (Figure 2.12). At about 11 km deep, it is the deepest place on Earth! To compare, the tallest place on Earth, Mount Everest, is less than 9 km tall. 	midocean ridges are the deepest places in the ocean	false
The ocean basin begins where the ocean meets the land. The continental margin begins at the shore and goes down to the ocean floor. It includes the continental shelf, slope, and rise. The continental shelf is part of the continent, but it is underwater today. It is about 100-200 meters deep, much shallower than the rest of the ocean. The continental shelf usually goes out about 100 to 200 kilometers from the shore (Figure 2.9). The continental slope is the slope that forms the edge of the continent. It is seaward of the continental shelf. In some places, a large pile of sediments brought from rivers creates the continental rise. The continental rise ends at the Besides seamounts, there are long, very tall (about 2 km) mountain ranges. These ranges are connected so that they form huge ridge systems called mid-ocean ridges (Figure 2.11). The mid-ocean ridges form from volcanic eruptions. Lava from inside Earth breaks through the crust and creates the mountains. The deepest places of the ocean are the ocean trenches. Many trenches line the edges of the Pacific Ocean. The Mariana Trench is the deepest place in the ocean. (Figure 2.12). At about 11 km deep, it is the deepest place on Earth! To compare, the tallest place on Earth, Mount Everest, is less than 9 km tall. 	the ocean basin begins where the ocean meets the land	true
As you know, the surface of Earth is not flat. Some places are high and some places are low. For example, mountain ranges like the Sierra Nevada in California or the Andes in South America are high above the surrounding areas. We can describe the topography of a region by measuring the height or depth of that feature relative to sea level (Figure mountains, while others are more like small hills! Relief, or terrain, includes all the landforms of a region. A topographic map shows the height, or elevation, of features in an area. This includes mountains, craters, valleys, and rivers. For example, Figure 2.5 shows the San Francisco Peaks in northern Arizona. Features on the map include mountains, hills and lava flows. You can recognize these features from the differences in elevation. We will talk about some different landforms in the next section. 	difference in elevation of landforms in a region	1.e
As you know, the surface of Earth is not flat. Some places are high and some places are low. For example, mountain ranges like the Sierra Nevada in California or the Andes in South America are high above the surrounding areas. We can describe the topography of a region by measuring the height or depth of that feature relative to sea level (Figure mountains, while others are more like small hills! Relief, or terrain, includes all the landforms of a region. A topographic map shows the height, or elevation, of features in an area. This includes mountains, craters, valleys, and rivers. For example, Figure 2.5 shows the San Francisco Peaks in northern Arizona. Features on the map include mountains, hills and lava flows. You can recognize these features from the differences in elevation. We will talk about some different landforms in the next section. 	land mass above sea level	2.c
As you know, the surface of Earth is not flat. Some places are high and some places are low. For example, mountain ranges like the Sierra Nevada in California or the Andes in South America are high above the surrounding areas. We can describe the topography of a region by measuring the height or depth of that feature relative to sea level (Figure mountains, while others are more like small hills! Relief, or terrain, includes all the landforms of a region. A topographic map shows the height, or elevation, of features in an area. This includes mountains, craters, valleys, and rivers. For example, Figure 2.5 shows the San Francisco Peaks in northern Arizona. Features on the map include mountains, hills and lava flows. You can recognize these features from the differences in elevation. We will talk about some different landforms in the next section. 	relief over a given region	3.f
When an object is moving, it is not enough to describe its location. We also need to know direction. Direction is important for describing moving objects. For example, a wind blows a storm over your school. Where is that storm coming from? Where is it going? The most common way to describe direction is by using a compass. A compass is a device with a floating needle (Figure 2.1). The needle is a small magnet that aligns itself with the Earths magnetic field. The compass needle always points to magnetic north. If you have a compass and you find north, you can then know any other direction. See the directions, such as east, south, west, etc., on a compass rose. A compass needle lines up with Earths magnetic north pole. This is different from Earths geographic north pole, or true north. The geographic north pole is the top of the imaginary axis around which Earth rotates. The geographic north pole is much like the spindle of a spinning top. The location of the geographic north pole does not change. However, the magnetic north pole shifts in location over time. Depending on where you live, you can correct for the difference between the two poles when you use a map and a compass (Figure 2.2). Some maps have a double compass rose. This allows users to make the corrections between magnetic north and true north. An example is a nautical chart that boaters use to chart their positions at sea (Figure 2.3). 	figure on a map or nautical chart that shows north south east and west	4.b
As you know, the surface of Earth is not flat. Some places are high and some places are low. For example, mountain ranges like the Sierra Nevada in California or the Andes in South America are high above the surrounding areas. We can describe the topography of a region by measuring the height or depth of that feature relative to sea level (Figure mountains, while others are more like small hills! Relief, or terrain, includes all the landforms of a region. A topographic map shows the height, or elevation, of features in an area. This includes mountains, craters, valleys, and rivers. For example, Figure 2.5 shows the San Francisco Peaks in northern Arizona. Features on the map include mountains, hills and lava flows. You can recognize these features from the differences in elevation. We will talk about some different landforms in the next section. 	height of a land feature measured relative to sea level	5. d
When an object is moving, it is not enough to describe its location. We also need to know direction. Direction is important for describing moving objects. For example, a wind blows a storm over your school. Where is that storm coming from? Where is it going? The most common way to describe direction is by using a compass. A compass is a device with a floating needle (Figure 2.1). The needle is a small magnet that aligns itself with the Earths magnetic field. The compass needle always points to magnetic north. If you have a compass and you find north, you can then know any other direction. See the directions, such as east, south, west, etc., on a compass rose. A compass needle lines up with Earths magnetic north pole. This is different from Earths geographic north pole, or true north. The geographic north pole is the top of the imaginary axis around which Earth rotates. The geographic north pole is much like the spindle of a spinning top. The location of the geographic north pole does not change. However, the magnetic north pole shifts in location over time. Depending on where you live, you can correct for the difference between the two poles when you use a map and a compass (Figure 2.2). Some maps have a double compass rose. This allows users to make the corrections between magnetic north and true north. An example is a nautical chart that boaters use to chart their positions at sea (Figure 2.3). 	device with a magnetic needle that is used to find the magnetic north pole	6. a
To describe your location wherever you are on Earths surface, you could use a coordinate system. For example, you could say that you are at 1234 Main Street, Springfield, Ohio. Or you could use a point of reference. If you want to meet up with a friend, you could tell him the distance and direction you are from the reference point. An example is, I am at the corner of Maple Street and Main Street, about two blocks north of your apartment. When studying Earths surface, scientists must be able to pinpoint a feature they are interested in. Scientists and others have a system to describe the location of any feature. Usually they use latitude and longitude as a coordinate system. Lines of latitude and longitude form a grid. The grid is centered on a reference point. You will learn about this type of grid when we discuss maps later in this chapter. 	physical feature on earths surface	7. g
Lines of latitude circle around Earth. The equator is a line of latitude right in the middle of the planet. The equator is an equal distance from both the North and South Pole. If you know your latitude, you know how far you are north or south of the equator. 	distance north or south of the equator	1.d
What if want to wrap a different approach? Lets say you dont want to wrap a flat piece of paper around a round object? You could put a flat piece of paper right on the area that you want to map. This type of map is called a gnomonic map projection (Figure 2.18). The paper only touches Earth at one point. The sizes and shapes of countries near that point are good. The poles are often mapped this way to avoid distortion. A gnomic projection is best for use over a small area. 	map made by projecting one point on earth onto a flat surface	2.c
Imagine you are going on a road trip. Perhaps you are going on vacation. How do you know where to go? Most likely, you will use a map. A map is a picture of specific parts of Earths surface. There are many types of maps. Each map gives us different information. Lets look at a road map, which is the probably the most common map that you use (Figure 2.13). 	map made by projecting earths surface onto a cylinder	3.g
Imagine you are going on a road trip. Perhaps you are going on vacation. How do you know where to go? Most likely, you will use a map. A map is a picture of specific parts of Earths surface. There are many types of maps. Each map gives us different information. Lets look at a road map, which is the probably the most common map that you use (Figure 2.13). 	map made by projecting earths surface onto a cone	4.a
Lines of longitude are circles that go around Earth from pole to pole, like the sections of an orange. Lines of longitude start at the Prime Meridian. The Prime Meridian is a circle that runs north to south and passes through Greenwich, England. Longitude tells you how far you are east or west from the Prime Meridian (Figure 2.21). You can remember latitude and longitude by doing jumping jacks. When your hands are above your head and your feet are together, say longitude (your body is long!). When you put your arms out to the side horizontally, say latitude (your head and arms make a cross, like the t in latitude). While you are jumping, your arms are going the same way as each of these grid lines: horizontal for latitude and vertical for longitude. 	distance east or west of the prime meridian	5.e
Most maps use a grid of lines to help you to find your location. This grid system is called a geographic coordinate system. Using this system you can define your location by two numbers, latitude and longitude. Both numbers are angles between your location, the center of Earth, and a reference line (Figure 2.20). 	numbers in a grid that locate a particular point	6.b
Imagine you are going on a road trip. Perhaps you are going on vacation. How do you know where to go? Most likely, you will use a map. A map is a picture of specific parts of Earths surface. There are many types of maps. Each map gives us different information. Lets look at a road map, which is the probably the most common map that you use (Figure 2.13). 	any method of representing earths curved surface in two dimensions	7.f
Instead of a cylinder, you could wrap the flat paper into a cone. Conic map projections use a cone shape to better represent regions near the poles (Figure 2.17). Conic projections are best where the cone shape touches the globe. This is along a line of latitude, usually the equator. 	all map projections have some disadvantage	true
Instead of a cylinder, you could wrap the flat paper into a cone. Conic map projections use a cone shape to better represent regions near the poles (Figure 2.17). Conic projections are best where the cone shape touches the globe. This is along a line of latitude, usually the equator. 	both robinson and mercator projections have distortion at the poles more than at the equator	true
In 1963, Arthur Robinson made a map with more accurate sizes and shapes of land areas. He did this using mathematical formulas. The formulas could directly translate coordinates onto the map. This type of projection is shaped like an oval rather than a rectangle (Figure 2.19). Robinsons map is more accurate than a Mercator projection. The shapes and sizes of continents are closer to true. Robinsons map is best within 45 degrees of the equator. Distances along the equator and the lines parallel to it are true. However, the scales along each line of latitude are different. In 1988, the National Geographic Society began to use Robinsons projection for its world maps. Whatever map projection is used, maps help us find places and to be able to get from one place to another. So how do you find your location on a map? 	gnomonic projections are most accurate when used for small geographic areas	true
Imagine you are going on a road trip. Perhaps you are going on vacation. How do you know where to go? Most likely, you will use a map. A map is a picture of specific parts of Earths surface. There are many types of maps. Each map gives us different information. Lets look at a road map, which is the probably the most common map that you use (Figure 2.13). 	the mercator projection unlike most other maps represents the world with south at the top of the map	false
Lines of latitude circle around Earth. The equator is a line of latitude right in the middle of the planet. The equator is an equal distance from both the North and South Pole. If you know your latitude, you know how far you are north or south of the equator. 	a globe is the most detailed map we have of earth	false
Imagine you are going on a road trip. Perhaps you are going on vacation. How do you know where to go? Most likely, you will use a map. A map is a picture of specific parts of Earths surface. There are many types of maps. Each map gives us different information. Lets look at a road map, which is the probably the most common map that you use (Figure 2.13). 	the top of a map generally represents north	true
Imagine you are going on a road trip. Perhaps you are going on vacation. How do you know where to go? Most likely, you will use a map. A map is a picture of specific parts of Earths surface. There are many types of maps. Each map gives us different information. Lets look at a road map, which is the probably the most common map that you use (Figure 2.13). 	a geographic map shows types and locations of rocks in an area	false
Instead of a cylinder, you could wrap the flat paper into a cone. Conic map projections use a cone shape to better represent regions near the poles (Figure 2.17). Conic projections are best where the cone shape touches the globe. This is along a line of latitude, usually the equator. 	mercator projections are no longer used today	false
What if want to wrap a different approach? Lets say you dont want to wrap a flat piece of paper around a round object? You could put a flat piece of paper right on the area that you want to map. This type of map is called a gnomonic map projection (Figure 2.18). The paper only touches Earth at one point. The sizes and shapes of countries near that point are good. The poles are often mapped this way to avoid distortion. A gnomic projection is best for use over a small area. 	on a mercator projection landmasses near the poles are reduced in size	false
What if want to wrap a different approach? Lets say you dont want to wrap a flat piece of paper around a round object? You could put a flat piece of paper right on the area that you want to map. This type of map is called a gnomonic map projection (Figure 2.18). The paper only touches Earth at one point. The sizes and shapes of countries near that point are good. The poles are often mapped this way to avoid distortion. A gnomic projection is best for use over a small area. 	the poles are often mapped with gnomonic projections to avoid distortion	true
In 1963, Arthur Robinson made a map with more accurate sizes and shapes of land areas. He did this using mathematical formulas. The formulas could directly translate coordinates onto the map. This type of projection is shaped like an oval rather than a rectangle (Figure 2.19). Robinsons map is more accurate than a Mercator projection. The shapes and sizes of continents are closer to true. Robinsons map is best within 45 degrees of the equator. Distances along the equator and the lines parallel to it are true. However, the scales along each line of latitude are different. In 1988, the National Geographic Society began to use Robinsons projection for its world maps. Whatever map projection is used, maps help us find places and to be able to get from one place to another. So how do you find your location on a map? 	a robinson projection is more accurate than a mercator projection	true
Lines of latitude circle around Earth. The equator is a line of latitude right in the middle of the planet. The equator is an equal distance from both the North and South Pole. If you know your latitude, you know how far you are north or south of the equator. 	lines of latitude meet at the poles	false
Most maps use a grid of lines to help you to find your location. This grid system is called a geographic coordinate system. Using this system you can define your location by two numbers, latitude and longitude. Both numbers are angles between your location, the center of Earth, and a reference line (Figure 2.20). 	lines of longitude are all parallel to one another	false
Most maps use a grid of lines to help you to find your location. This grid system is called a geographic coordinate system. Using this system you can define your location by two numbers, latitude and longitude. Both numbers are angles between your location, the center of Earth, and a reference line (Figure 2.20). 	you can find your location on a map if you know only your latitude and longitude	true
Earth is a sphere and so is a globe. A globe is the best way to make a map of the whole Earth. Because both the planet and a globe have curved surfaces, the sizes and shapes of countries are not distorted. Distances are true to scale. (Figure 2.23). Globes usually have a geographic coordinate system and a scale. The shortest distance between two points on a globe is the length of the portion of a circle that connects them. Globes are difficult to make and carry around. They also cannot be enlarged to show the details of any particular area. Globes are best sitting on your desk for reference. Google Earth is a neat site to download to your computer. This is a link that you can follow to get there: http://w tilt your image and lots more. 	distances are true to scale on a globe	true
Contour lines connect all the points on the map that have the same elevation. Lets take a closer look at this (Figure Each contour line represents a specific elevation. The contour line connects all the points that are at the same elevation. Every fifth contour line is made bold. The bold contour lines have numbers to show elevation. Contour lines run next to each other and NEVER cross one another. If the lines crossed it would mean that one place had two different elevations. This cannot happen. 	on a topographic map only the contour lines that are numbered represent changes in elevation	false
Oceanographers use a type of topographic map that shows water depths (Figure 2.32). On this map, the contour lines represent depth below the surface. Therefore, high numbers are deeper depths and low numbers are shallow depths. These maps are made from depth soundings or sonar data. They help oceanographers understand the shape of bottoms of lakes, bays, and the ocean. This information also helps boaters navigate safely. 	two contour lines on a topographic may be parallel or they may intersect each other	false
Since each contour line represents a specific elevation, two different contour are separated by the same difference in elevation (e.g. 20 ft or 100 ft.). This difference between contour lines is called the contour interval. You can calculate the contour interval by following these steps: a. Take the difference in elevation between 2 bold lines. b. Divide that difference by the number of contour lines between them. Imagine that the difference between two bold lines is 100 feet and there are five lines between them. What is the contour interval? If you answered 20 feet, then you are correct (100 ft/5 lines = 20 ft between lines). The legend on the map also gives the contour interval. 	the contour interval of a topographic map represents the horizontal distance between contour lines	false
As we mentioned above, topographic maps show the shape of the land. You can determine a lot of information about the landscape using a topographic map. These maps are invaluable for Earth scientists. 	you can use a topographic map to determine the slope of the land	true
Contour lines connect all the points on the map that have the same elevation. Lets take a closer look at this (Figure Each contour line represents a specific elevation. The contour line connects all the points that are at the same elevation. Every fifth contour line is made bold. The bold contour lines have numbers to show elevation. Contour lines run next to each other and NEVER cross one another. If the lines crossed it would mean that one place had two different elevations. This cannot happen. 	on a bathymetric map contour lines represent the distance to the bottom of the water	true
As we mentioned above, topographic maps show the shape of the land. You can determine a lot of information about the landscape using a topographic map. These maps are invaluable for Earth scientists. 	a topographic map can be used to determine the direction that rivers and streams flow	true
As we mentioned above, topographic maps show the shape of the land. You can determine a lot of information about the landscape using a topographic map. These maps are invaluable for Earth scientists. 	a topographic map of a mountain shows which side of the mountain is steepest	true
Oceanographers use a type of topographic map that shows water depths (Figure 2.32). On this map, the contour lines represent depth below the surface. Therefore, high numbers are deeper depths and low numbers are shallow depths. These maps are made from depth soundings or sonar data. They help oceanographers understand the shape of bottoms of lakes, bays, and the ocean. This information also helps boaters navigate safely. 	if contour lines are so close together that they almost touch they represent a plain or plateau	false
As we mentioned above, topographic maps show the shape of the land. You can determine a lot of information about the landscape using a topographic map. These maps are invaluable for Earth scientists. 	topographic maps are useful only to geologists and other earth scientists	false
A geologic map shows the different rocks that are exposed at the surface of a region. Rock units are shown in a color identified in a key. On the geologic map of the Grand Canyon, for example, different rock types are shown in different colors. Some people call the Grand Canyon layer cake geology because most of the rock units are in layers. Rock units show up on both sides of a stream valley. A geologic map looks very complicated in a region where rock layers have been folded, like the patterns in marble cake. Faults are seen on this geologic map cutting across rock layers. When rock layers are tilted, you will see stripes of each layer on the map. There are symbols on a geologic map that tell you which direction the rock layers slant, and often there is a cut away diagram, called a cross section, that shows what the rock layers look like below the surface. A large-scale geologic map will just show geologic provinces. They do not show the detail of individual rock layers. 	geologic maps use different colors to represent different types of rocks	true
Since each contour line represents a specific elevation, two different contour are separated by the same difference in elevation (e.g. 20 ft or 100 ft.). This difference between contour lines is called the contour interval. You can calculate the contour interval by following these steps: a. Take the difference in elevation between 2 bold lines. b. Divide that difference by the number of contour lines between them. Imagine that the difference between two bold lines is 100 feet and there are five lines between them. What is the contour interval? If you answered 20 feet, then you are correct (100 ft/5 lines = 20 ft between lines). The legend on the map also gives the contour interval. 	the difference between two contour lines is the contour interval	true
As we mentioned above, topographic maps show the shape of the land. You can determine a lot of information about the landscape using a topographic map. These maps are invaluable for Earth scientists. 	contour lines help us to see the threedimensional shape of the land	true
Contour lines connect all the points on the map that have the same elevation. Lets take a closer look at this (Figure Each contour line represents a specific elevation. The contour line connects all the points that are at the same elevation. Every fifth contour line is made bold. The bold contour lines have numbers to show elevation. Contour lines run next to each other and NEVER cross one another. If the lines crossed it would mean that one place had two different elevations. This cannot happen. 	concentric lines that are very far apart show a high steep hill	false
As we mentioned above, topographic maps show the shape of the land. You can determine a lot of information about the landscape using a topographic map. These maps are invaluable for Earth scientists. 	the hatch marks on a topographic map are drawn on the side of the circle with the higher elevation	false
As we mentioned above, topographic maps show the shape of the land. You can determine a lot of information about the landscape using a topographic map. These maps are invaluable for Earth scientists. 	while topographic maps can show vertical distances they cannot show horizontal distances	false
As we mentioned above, topographic maps show the shape of the land. You can determine a lot of information about the landscape using a topographic map. These maps are invaluable for Earth scientists. 	feature on a topographic map represented by concentric contour lines with hatch marks	1.d
Oceanographers use a type of topographic map that shows water depths (Figure 2.32). On this map, the contour lines represent depth below the surface. Therefore, high numbers are deeper depths and low numbers are shallow depths. These maps are made from depth soundings or sonar data. They help oceanographers understand the shape of bottoms of lakes, bays, and the ocean. This information also helps boaters navigate safely. 	map that shows water depths in a body of water	2.f
Since each contour line represents a specific elevation, two different contour are separated by the same difference in elevation (e.g. 20 ft or 100 ft.). This difference between contour lines is called the contour interval. You can calculate the contour interval by following these steps: a. Take the difference in elevation between 2 bold lines. b. Divide that difference by the number of contour lines between them. Imagine that the difference between two bold lines is 100 feet and there are five lines between them. What is the contour interval? If you answered 20 feet, then you are correct (100 ft/5 lines = 20 ft between lines). The legend on the map also gives the contour interval. 	difference in elevation between adjacent contour lines on a topographic map	3.a
Oceanographers use a type of topographic map that shows water depths (Figure 2.32). On this map, the contour lines represent depth below the surface. Therefore, high numbers are deeper depths and low numbers are shallow depths. These maps are made from depth soundings or sonar data. They help oceanographers understand the shape of bottoms of lakes, bays, and the ocean. This information also helps boaters navigate safely. 	map that shows elevations of features on earths surface	4.b
As we mentioned above, topographic maps show the shape of the land. You can determine a lot of information about the landscape using a topographic map. These maps are invaluable for Earth scientists. 	feature on a topographic map represented by concentric contour lines without hatch marks	5.g
As we mentioned above, topographic maps show the shape of the land. You can determine a lot of information about the landscape using a topographic map. These maps are invaluable for Earth scientists. 	line connecting points with the same elevation on a topographic map	6.c
As we mentioned above, topographic maps show the shape of the land. You can determine a lot of information about the landscape using a topographic map. These maps are invaluable for Earth scientists. 	feature on a topographic map represented by vshaped contour lines	7.e
Satellites orbit high above the Earth in several ways. Different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet. 	satellites can be used to track the paths of hurricanes	true
Satellites orbit high above the Earth in several ways. Different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet. 	all satellites orbit earth from east to west	false
Satellites orbit high above the Earth in several ways. Different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet. 	communications satellites have polar orbits	false
Satellites orbit high above the Earth in several ways. Different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet. 	a polar orbit is a shorter orbit than a geostationary orbit	false
Satellites orbit high above the Earth in several ways. Different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet. 	some weather satellites have geostationary orbits	true
Satellites orbit high above the Earth in several ways. Different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet. 	gps can only be done with a minimum of 4 satellites	true
Satellites orbit high above the Earth in several ways. Different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet. 	polar orbits are closer to earth than geostationary orbits	false
Satellites orbit high above the Earth in several ways. Different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet. 	satellites in polar orbits always remain over earths north or south pole	false
A satellite in a geostationary orbit flies above the planet at a distance of 36,000 km. It takes 24 hours to complete one orbit. The satellite and the Earth both complete one rotation in 24 hours. This means that the satellite stays over the same spot. Weather satellites use this type of orbit to observe changing weather conditions over a region. Communications satellites, like satellite TV, use this type of orbit to keep communications going full time. 	gis stands for geostationary information system	false
Satellites orbit high above the Earth in several ways. Different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet. 	satellites identify vegetation by the color of light it reflects	true
Prior to the late 20th and early 21st centuries, mapmakers sent people out in the field to determine the boundaries and locations for various features for maps. State or county borders were used to mark geological features. Today, people in the field use GPS receivers to mark the locations of features. Map-makers also use various satellite images and computers to draw maps. Computers are able to break apart the fine details of a satellite image, store the pieces of information, and put them back together to make a map. In some instances, computers can make 3-D images of the map and even animate them. For example, scientists used computers and satellite images from Mars to create a 3-D image of Mars ice cap (Figure 2.39). The image makes you feel as if you are looking at the ice cap from the surface of Mars. When you link any type of information to a location, you can put together incredibly useful maps and images. The information could be numbers of people living in an area, types of plants or soil, locations of groundwater or levels of rainfall. As long as you can link the information to a position with a GPS receiver, you can store it in a computer for later processing and map-making. This type of mapping is called a Geographic Information System (GIS). Geologists can use GIS to make maps of natural resources. City leaders might link these resources to where people live and help plan the growth of cities or communities. Other types of data can be linked by GIS. For example, Figure 2.40 shows a map of the counties where farmers made insurance claims for crop damage in 2008. Computers have improved how maps are made. They have also increased the amount of information that can be displayed. During the 21st century, computers will be used more and more in mapping. 	computers increase the accuracy of maps made from satellite images and satellite data	true
Satellites orbit high above the Earth in several ways. Different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet. 	the higher above earth that a satellite orbits the smaller the view it is able to see	false
In order to locate your position on a map, you must know your latitude and your longitude. But you need several instruments to measure latitude and longitude. What if you could do the same thing with only one instrument? Satellites can also help you locate your position on the Earths surface. By 1993, the United States military had launched 24 satellites to help soldiers locate their positions on battlefields. This system of satellites was called the Global Positioning System (GPS). Later, the United States government allowed the public to use this system. Heres how it works. You must have a GPS receiver to use the system (Figure 2.38). You can buy many types of these in stores. The 	satellites can help you locate your precise position on earths surface	true
In order to locate your position on a map, you must know your latitude and your longitude. But you need several instruments to measure latitude and longitude. What if you could do the same thing with only one instrument? Satellites can also help you locate your position on the Earths surface. By 1993, the United States military had launched 24 satellites to help soldiers locate their positions on battlefields. This system of satellites was called the Global Positioning System (GPS). Later, the United States government allowed the public to use this system. Heres how it works. You must have a GPS receiver to use the system (Figure 2.38). You can buy many types of these in stores. The 	a gps receiver detects lines of latitude and longitude	false
Prior to the late 20th and early 21st centuries, mapmakers sent people out in the field to determine the boundaries and locations for various features for maps. State or county borders were used to mark geological features. Today, people in the field use GPS receivers to mark the locations of features. Map-makers also use various satellite images and computers to draw maps. Computers are able to break apart the fine details of a satellite image, store the pieces of information, and put them back together to make a map. In some instances, computers can make 3-D images of the map and even animate them. For example, scientists used computers and satellite images from Mars to create a 3-D image of Mars ice cap (Figure 2.39). The image makes you feel as if you are looking at the ice cap from the surface of Mars. When you link any type of information to a location, you can put together incredibly useful maps and images. The information could be numbers of people living in an area, types of plants or soil, locations of groundwater or levels of rainfall. As long as you can link the information to a position with a GPS receiver, you can store it in a computer for later processing and map-making. This type of mapping is called a Geographic Information System (GIS). Geologists can use GIS to make maps of natural resources. City leaders might link these resources to where people live and help plan the growth of cities or communities. Other types of data can be linked by GIS. For example, Figure 2.40 shows a map of the counties where farmers made insurance claims for crop damage in 2008. Computers have improved how maps are made. They have also increased the amount of information that can be displayed. During the 21st century, computers will be used more and more in mapping. 	any type of information that can be linked with locations can be used to make a map	true
Satellites orbit high above the Earth in several ways. Different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet. 	us government agency that has launched a fleet of scientific satellites	1.f
Satellites orbit high above the Earth in several ways. Different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet. 	type of orbit that allows a satellite to see all of earths surface in less than a day	2.c
Satellites orbit high above the Earth in several ways. Different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet. 	artificial body that orbits earth	3.d
In order to locate your position on a map, you must know your latitude and your longitude. But you need several instruments to measure latitude and longitude. What if you could do the same thing with only one instrument? Satellites can also help you locate your position on the Earths surface. By 1993, the United States military had launched 24 satellites to help soldiers locate their positions on battlefields. This system of satellites was called the Global Positioning System (GPS). Later, the United States government allowed the public to use this system. Heres how it works. You must have a GPS receiver to use the system (Figure 2.38). You can buy many types of these in stores. The 	system of satellites used to locate exact positions on earths surface	4.g
In order to locate your position on a map, you must know your latitude and your longitude. But you need several instruments to measure latitude and longitude. What if you could do the same thing with only one instrument? Satellites can also help you locate your position on the Earths surface. By 1993, the United States military had launched 24 satellites to help soldiers locate their positions on battlefields. This system of satellites was called the Global Positioning System (GPS). Later, the United States government allowed the public to use this system. Heres how it works. You must have a GPS receiver to use the system (Figure 2.38). You can buy many types of these in stores. The 	device that detects radio signals from satellites to determine its position on earths surface	5.b
Satellites orbit high above the Earth in several ways. Different orbits are important for viewing different things about the planet. 	type of orbit that allows a satellite to stay over the same location on earths surface	6.a
In order to locate your position on a map, you must know your latitude and your longitude. But you need several instruments to measure latitude and longitude. What if you could do the same thing with only one instrument? Satellites can also help you locate your position on the Earths surface. By 1993, the United States military had launched 24 satellites to help soldiers locate their positions on battlefields. This system of satellites was called the Global Positioning System (GPS). Later, the United States government allowed the public to use this system. Heres how it works. You must have a GPS receiver to use the system (Figure 2.38). You can buy many types of these in stores. The 	system that links gps information with other types of information	7.e
Renewable resources can be renewed as they are used. An example is timber, which comes from trees. New trees can be planted to replace those that are cut down. Sunlight is a renewable resource. It seems we will never run out of that! Just because a resource is renewable, it doesnt mean we should use it carelessly. If we arent careful, we can pollute resources. Then they may no longer be fit for use. Water is one example. If we pollute a water source it may not be usable for drinking, bathing or any other type of use. We can also overuse resources that should be renewable. In this case the resources may not be able to recover. For example, fish are renewable resources. Thats because they can reproduce and make more fish. But water pollution and overfishing can cause them to die out if their population becomes too low. Figure 20.1 shows another example. 	drinking bottled water is better for you and the environment	false
How can we protect Earths natural resources? One answer is conservation. This means saving resources. We need to save resources so some will be left for the future. We also need to protect resources from pollution and overuse. When we conserve resources, we also cut down on the trash we produce. Americans throw out 340 million tons of trash each year. We throw out 2.5 million plastic bottles alone every hour! Most of what we throw out ends up in landfills. You can see a landfill in Figure 20.4. In a landfill, all those plastic bottles take hundreds of years to break down. What are the problems caused by producing so much trash? Natural resources must be used to produce the materials. Land must be given over to dump the materials. If the materials are toxic, they may cause pollution. 	it is usually better to throw something away than to fix it	false
Renewable resources can be renewed as they are used. An example is timber, which comes from trees. New trees can be planted to replace those that are cut down. Sunlight is a renewable resource. It seems we will never run out of that! Just because a resource is renewable, it doesnt mean we should use it carelessly. If we arent careful, we can pollute resources. Then they may no longer be fit for use. Water is one example. If we pollute a water source it may not be usable for drinking, bathing or any other type of use. We can also overuse resources that should be renewable. In this case the resources may not be able to recover. For example, fish are renewable resources. Thats because they can reproduce and make more fish. But water pollution and overfishing can cause them to die out if their population becomes too low. Figure 20.1 shows another example. 	pollution occurs when a product is produced and when it is tossed away	true
Reducing resource use means just what it says using fewer resources. There are lots of ways to reduce our use of resources. Buy durable goods. Choose items that are well made so they will last longer. Youll buy fewer items in the long run, so youll save money as well as resources. Thats a win-win! Repair rather than replace. Fix your bike rather than buying a new one. Sew on a button instead of buying a new shirt. Youll use fewer resources and save money. Buy only what you need. Dont buy a gallon of milk if you can only drink half of it before it spoils. Instead, buy a half gallon and drink all of it. You wont be wasting resources (or money!). Buy local. For example, buy local produce at a farmers market, like the one in Figure 20.5. A lot of resources are saved by not shipping goods long distances. Products bought at farmers markets use less packaging, too! About a third of what we throw out is packaging. Try to buy items with the least amount of packaging. For example, buy bulk items instead of those that are individually wrapped. Also, try to select items with packaging that can be reused or recycled. This is called precycling. Pop cans and plastic water bottles, for example, are fairly easy to recycle. Some types of packaging are harder to recycle. You can see examples in Figure 20.6. If it cant be reused or recycled, its a waste of resources. Many plastics: The recycling symbol on the bottom of plastic containers shows the type of plastic they contain. Numbers 1 and 2 are easier to recycle than higher numbers. Mixed materials: Packaging that contains more than one material may be hard to recycle. This carton is made mostly of cardboard. But it has plastic around the opening. 	your community probably recycles plastics that have certain numbers on them	true
Every 20 minutes, the human population adds 3,500 more people. More people need more resources. For example, we now use five times more fossil fuels than we did in 1970. The human population is expected to increase for at least 40 years. What will happen to resource use? 	soil is considered a nonrenewable resource	false
Every 20 minutes, the human population adds 3,500 more people. More people need more resources. For example, we now use five times more fossil fuels than we did in 1970. The human population is expected to increase for at least 40 years. What will happen to resource use? 	renewable resources cannot be overused	false
We need natural resources for just about everything we do. We need them for food and clothing, for building materials and energy. We even need them to have fun. Table 20.1 gives examples of how we use natural resources. Can you think of other ways we use natural resources? Use Vehicles Resources Rubber for tires from rubber trees Steel frames and other metal parts from minerals such as iron Example iron ore Use Electronics Resources Plastic cases from petroleum prod- ucts Glass screens from minerals such as lead Example lead ore Homes Nails from minerals such as iron Timber from trees spruce timber Jewelry Gemstones such as diamonds Minerals such as silver silver ore Food Sunlight, water, and soil Minerals such as phosphorus corn seeds in soil Clothing Wool from sheep Cotton from cotton plants cotton plants Recreation Water for boating and swimming Forests for hiking and camping pine forest Some natural resources are renewable. Others are not. It depends in part on how we use them. 	both plastic and rubber are made from petroleum	false
Some resources cant be renewed. At least, they cant be renewed fast enough to keep up with use. Fossil fuels are examples. It takes millions of years for them to form. We are using them up much more quickly. Elements that are used to produce nuclear power are other examples. They include uranium. This element is already rare. Sooner or later, it will run out. Supplies of non-renewable resources are shrinking. This makes them harder to get. Oil is a good example. Oil reserves beneath land are running out. So oil companies have started to drill for oil far out in the ocean. This costs more money. Its also more dangerous. Figure 20.2 shows an oil rig that exploded in 2010. The explosion killed 11 people. Millions of barrels of oil spilled into the water. It took months to plug the leak. 	elements that are used to produce nuclear power are renewable resources	false
Some resources cant be renewed. At least, they cant be renewed fast enough to keep up with use. Fossil fuels are examples. It takes millions of years for them to form. We are using them up much more quickly. Elements that are used to produce nuclear power are other examples. They include uranium. This element is already rare. Sooner or later, it will run out. Supplies of non-renewable resources are shrinking. This makes them harder to get. Oil is a good example. Oil reserves beneath land are running out. So oil companies have started to drill for oil far out in the ocean. This costs more money. Its also more dangerous. Figure 20.2 shows an oil rig that exploded in 2010. The explosion killed 11 people. Millions of barrels of oil spilled into the water. It took months to plug the leak. 	oil reserves beneath land are running out	true
How can we protect Earths natural resources? One answer is conservation. This means saving resources. We need to save resources so some will be left for the future. We also need to protect resources from pollution and overuse. When we conserve resources, we also cut down on the trash we produce. Americans throw out 340 million tons of trash each year. We throw out 2.5 million plastic bottles alone every hour! Most of what we throw out ends up in landfills. You can see a landfill in Figure 20.4. In a landfill, all those plastic bottles take hundreds of years to break down. What are the problems caused by producing so much trash? Natural resources must be used to produce the materials. Land must be given over to dump the materials. If the materials are toxic, they may cause pollution. 	when we conserve resources we also produce less trash	true
Every 20 minutes, the human population adds 3,500 more people. More people need more resources. For example, we now use five times more fossil fuels than we did in 1970. The human population is expected to increase for at least 40 years. What will happen to resource use? 	we use less of fossil fuels today than we did in the 1970s	false
Many things can be recycled. The materials in them can be reused in new products. For example, plastic water bottles can be recycled. The recycled material can be made into t-shirts! Old phone books can also be recycled and made into textbooks. When you shop for new products, look for those that are made of recycled materials (see Figure 20.8). Even food scraps and lawn waste can be recycled. They can be composted and turned into humus for the garden. At most recycling centers, you can drop off metal cans, cardboard and paper products, glass containers, and plastic bottles. Recycling stations like the one in Figure 20.9 are common. Curbside recycling usually takes these items too. Do you know how to recycle in your community? Contact your local solid waste authority to find out. If you dont already recycle, start today. Its a big way you can help the planet! 	china uses more paper per person than any other country	false
Every 20 minutes, the human population adds 3,500 more people. More people need more resources. For example, we now use five times more fossil fuels than we did in 1970. The human population is expected to increase for at least 40 years. What will happen to resource use? 	it costs more to recycle resources than to use new resources	false
You probably already know about the three Rs. They stand for reduce, reuse, and recycle. The third R recycle has caught on in a big way. Thats because its easy. There are thousands of places to drop off items such as aluminum cans for recycling. Many cities allow you to just put your recycling in a special can and put it at the curb. We havent done as well with the first two Rs reducing and reusing. But they arent always as easy as recycling. Recycling is better than making things from brand new materials. But it still takes some resources to turn recycled items into new ones. It takes no resources at all to reuse items or not buy them in the first place. 	recycling used products is the same as reusing them	false
Many things can be recycled. The materials in them can be reused in new products. For example, plastic water bottles can be recycled. The recycled material can be made into t-shirts! Old phone books can also be recycled and made into textbooks. When you shop for new products, look for those that are made of recycled materials (see Figure 20.8). Even food scraps and lawn waste can be recycled. They can be composted and turned into humus for the garden. At most recycling centers, you can drop off metal cans, cardboard and paper products, glass containers, and plastic bottles. Recycling stations like the one in Figure 20.9 are common. Curbside recycling usually takes these items too. Do you know how to recycle in your community? Contact your local solid waste authority to find out. If you dont already recycle, start today. Its a big way you can help the planet! 	recycled plastic water bottles can be made into tshirts	true
Every 20 minutes, the human population adds 3,500 more people. More people need more resources. For example, we now use five times more fossil fuels than we did in 1970. The human population is expected to increase for at least 40 years. What will happen to resource use? 	example of a renewable resource	1.e
Every 20 minutes, the human population adds 3,500 more people. More people need more resources. For example, we now use five times more fossil fuels than we did in 1970. The human population is expected to increase for at least 40 years. What will happen to resource use? 	saving resources	2.c
Every 20 minutes, the human population adds 3,500 more people. More people need more resources. For example, we now use five times more fossil fuels than we did in 1970. The human population is expected to increase for at least 40 years. What will happen to resource use? 	any natural resource that will not run out if we use it wisely	3.d
We need natural resources for just about everything we do. We need them for food and clothing, for building materials and energy. We even need them to have fun. Table 20.1 gives examples of how we use natural resources. Can you think of other ways we use natural resources? Use Vehicles Resources Rubber for tires from rubber trees Steel frames and other metal parts from minerals such as iron Example iron ore Use Electronics Resources Plastic cases from petroleum prod- ucts Glass screens from minerals such as lead Example lead ore Homes Nails from minerals such as iron Timber from trees spruce timber Jewelry Gemstones such as diamonds Minerals such as silver silver ore Food Sunlight, water, and soil Minerals such as phosphorus corn seeds in soil Clothing Wool from sheep Cotton from cotton plants cotton plants Recreation Water for boating and swimming Forests for hiking and camping pine forest Some natural resources are renewable. Others are not. It depends in part on how we use them. 	anything in nature that humans need	4.a
Reusing resources means using items again instead of throwing them away. A reused item can be used in the same way by someone else. Or it can be used in a new way. For example, Shana has a pair of jeans she has outgrown. She might give them to her younger sister to wear. Or she might use them to make something different for herself, say, a denim shoulder bag. Some other ideas for reusing resources are shown in Figure 20.7. 	buying items with reusable or recyclable packaging	5.f
Every 20 minutes, the human population adds 3,500 more people. More people need more resources. For example, we now use five times more fossil fuels than we did in 1970. The human population is expected to increase for at least 40 years. What will happen to resource use? 	example of a nonrenewable resource	6.b
Every 20 minutes, the human population adds 3,500 more people. More people need more resources. For example, we now use five times more fossil fuels than we did in 1970. The human population is expected to increase for at least 40 years. What will happen to resource use? 	any natural resource that will run out if we keep using it	7. g
Figure 20.10 shows the major ways energy is used in the U.S. A lot of energy is used in homes. In fact, more energy is used in homes than in stores and businesses. Even more energy is used for transportation. A lot of fuel is necessary to move people and goods around the country. Industry uses the most energy. Industrial uses account for one-third of all the energy used in the U.S. 	in the us more energy is used for transportation than for any other single purpose	false
Nonrenewable energy resources will run out before long. Using these energy resources also produces pollution and increases global warming. For all these reasons, we need to use less of these energy sources. We also need to use them more efficiently. 	nonrenewable energy resources used in the us include nuclear energy	true
Figure 20.11 shows the energy resources used in the U.S. The U.S. depends mainly on fossil fuels. Petroleum is used more than any other resource. Renewable energy resources, such as solar and wind energy, could provide all the energy we need, but they are not yet widely used in the U.S. 	the renewable energy resource that is used most in the us is solar energy	false
Figure 20.11 shows the energy resources used in the U.S. The U.S. depends mainly on fossil fuels. Petroleum is used more than any other resource. Renewable energy resources, such as solar and wind energy, could provide all the energy we need, but they are not yet widely used in the U.S. 	solar energy usually must be transported long distances to be useful	false
Figure 20.11 shows the energy resources used in the U.S. The U.S. depends mainly on fossil fuels. Petroleum is used more than any other resource. Renewable energy resources, such as solar and wind energy, could provide all the energy we need, but they are not yet widely used in the U.S. 	the purpose of solar panels is to prevent sunlight from overheating a home	false
Nonrenewable energy resources will run out before long. Using these energy resources also produces pollution and increases global warming. For all these reasons, we need to use less of these energy sources. We also need to use them more efficiently. 	most nonrenewable energy resources will last thousands of years if we conserve them	false
Figure 20.11 shows the energy resources used in the U.S. The U.S. depends mainly on fossil fuels. Petroleum is used more than any other resource. Renewable energy resources, such as solar and wind energy, could provide all the energy we need, but they are not yet widely used in the U.S. 	collecting sunlight for solar energy requires solar energy power plants	false
We can get more work out of the energy we use. Table 20.3 show some ways to use energy more efficiently. By getting more bang for the buck, we wont need to use as much energy overall. Does your family use energy efficiently? How could you find out? Use of Energy More Efficient Use Another way to use energy more efficiently is with Energy Star appliances. They carry the Energy Star logo, shown in Figure 20.14. To be certified as Energy Star, the appliance must use less energy. Energy Star appliances save a lot of energy over their lifetime. What if millions of households used Energy Star appliances? How much energy would it save? 	you can save more energy by unplugging appliances than just turning them off	true
Nonrenewable energy resources will run out before long. Using these energy resources also produces pollution and increases global warming. For all these reasons, we need to use less of these energy sources. We also need to use them more efficiently. 	a car uses gasoline more efficiently if it is driven faster than 55 mihr	false
We can get more work out of the energy we use. Table 20.3 show some ways to use energy more efficiently. By getting more bang for the buck, we wont need to use as much energy overall. Does your family use energy efficiently? How could you find out? Use of Energy More Efficient Use Another way to use energy more efficiently is with Energy Star appliances. They carry the Energy Star logo, shown in Figure 20.14. To be certified as Energy Star, the appliance must use less energy. Energy Star appliances save a lot of energy over their lifetime. What if millions of households used Energy Star appliances? How much energy would it save? 	you can save electricity by using compact fluorescent light bulbs	true
Nonrenewable energy resources will run out before long. Using these energy resources also produces pollution and increases global warming. For all these reasons, we need to use less of these energy sources. We also need to use them more efficiently. 	if the cost of oil goes up sources that were too expensive to extract may become economical	true
Figure 20.11 shows the energy resources used in the U.S. The U.S. depends mainly on fossil fuels. Petroleum is used more than any other resource. Renewable energy resources, such as solar and wind energy, could provide all the energy we need, but they are not yet widely used in the U.S. 	fuel that is refined from petroleum	1.b
Nonrenewable energy resources will run out before long. Using these energy resources also produces pollution and increases global warming. For all these reasons, we need to use less of these energy sources. We also need to use them more efficiently. 	to increase energy efficiency be sure that equipment is running well	true
Figure 20.11 shows the energy resources used in the U.S. The U.S. depends mainly on fossil fuels. Petroleum is used more than any other resource. Renewable energy resources, such as solar and wind energy, could provide all the energy we need, but they are not yet widely used in the U.S. 	energy resource that is used more than any other in the us	2.e
Nonrenewable energy resources will run out before long. Using these energy resources also produces pollution and increases global warming. For all these reasons, we need to use less of these energy sources. We also need to use them more efficiently. 	conserving resources cuts down on trash	true
Figure 20.11 shows the energy resources used in the U.S. The U.S. depends mainly on fossil fuels. Petroleum is used more than any other resource. Renewable energy resources, such as solar and wind energy, could provide all the energy we need, but they are not yet widely used in the U.S. 	plant that separates petroleum into different products	3.d
Figure 20.11 shows the energy resources used in the U.S. The U.S. depends mainly on fossil fuels. Petroleum is used more than any other resource. Renewable energy resources, such as solar and wind energy, could provide all the energy we need, but they are not yet widely used in the U.S. 	example of a renewable energy resource	4.c
Think about your typical day. How do you use energy? Do you take a shower when you first get out of bed? What about taking a shower uses energy? It takes energy to heat the water and to pump the water to your home. Do you eat a hot breakfast? Energy is used to cook your food. Do you ride a bus or have someone drive you to school? Motor vehicles need energy from fossil fuels to run. 	the best energy source would be one that supplies a lot of energy and takes a lot of energy to make it	false
Figure 20.10 shows the major ways energy is used in the U.S. A lot of energy is used in homes. In fact, more energy is used in homes than in stores and businesses. Even more energy is used for transportation. A lot of fuel is necessary to move people and goods around the country. Industry uses the most energy. Industrial uses account for one-third of all the energy used in the U.S. 	individuals can only do a little to increase energy efficiency because most energy is used by industry	false
Nonrenewable energy resources will run out before long. Using these energy resources also produces pollution and increases global warming. For all these reasons, we need to use less of these energy sources. We also need to use them more efficiently. 	largest single use of energy in the us	5.a
Figure 21.1 shows how people use water worldwide. The greatest use is for agriculture and then industry. Municipal use is last, but is also important. Municipal use refers to water used by homes and businesses in communities. 	all forms of life need water to survive	true
Figure 21.1 shows how people use water worldwide. The greatest use is for agriculture and then industry. Municipal use is last, but is also important. Municipal use refers to water used by homes and businesses in communities. 	we can live longer without water than we can without food	false
Many crops are grown where there isnt enough rainfall for plants to thrive. For example, crops are grown in deserts of the American southwest. How is this possible? The answer is irrigation. Irrigation is any way of providing extra water to plants. Most of the water used in agriculture is used for irrigation. Livestock also use water, but they use much less. Irrigation can waste a lot of water. The type of irrigation shown in Figure 21.2 is the most wasteful. The water is sprayed into the air and then falls to the ground. But much of the water never reaches the crops. Instead, it evaporates in the air or runs off the fields. Irrigation water may cause other problems. The water may dissolve agricultural chemicals such as pesticides. When the water soaks into the ground, the dissolved chemicals do, too. They may enter groundwater or run off into rivers or lakes. Salts in irrigation water can also collect in the soil. The soil may get too salty for plants to grow. 	irrigation may add unwanted chemicals to groundwater	true
There are many ways to use water for fun, from white water rafting to snorkeling. When you do these activities you dont actually use water. You are doing the activity on or in the water. What do you think is the single biggest use of water for fun? Believe it or not, its golf! Keeping golf courses green uses an incredible amount of water. Since many golf courses are in sunny areas, much of the water is irrigation water. Many golf courses, like the one in Figure 21.4, have sprinkler systems. Like any similar sprinkler system, much of this water is wasted. It evaporates or runs off the ground. 	large irrigation systems may waste a lot of water	true
Almost a quarter of the water used worldwide is used in industry. Industries use water for many purposes. Chemical processes need a lot of water. Water is used to generate electricity. An important way that industries use water is to cool machines and power plants. 	water can be used to generate electricity	true
Most Americans have plenty of fresh, clean water. But many people around the world do not. In fact, water scarcity is the worlds most serious resource problem. How can that be? Water is almost everywhere. More than 70 percent of Earths surface is covered by water. 	water scarcity is not a problem since 70 of earth is covered by water	false
Most Americans have plenty of fresh, clean water. But many people around the world do not. In fact, water scarcity is the worlds most serious resource problem. How can that be? Water is almost everywhere. More than 70 percent of Earths surface is covered by water. 	more than 70 percent of earths surface is covered with water	true
One problem is that only a tiny fraction of Earths water is fresh, liquid water that people can use. More than 97 percent of Earths water is salt water in the oceans. Just 3 percent is freshwater. Most of the freshwater is frozen in ice sheets, icebergs, and glaciers (see Figure 21.5). 	glaciers are a source of fresh water in some locations	true
Most Americans have plenty of fresh, clean water. But many people around the world do not. In fact, water scarcity is the worlds most serious resource problem. How can that be? Water is almost everywhere. More than 70 percent of Earths surface is covered by water. 	most people in the world have enough clean fresh water	false
Most Americans have plenty of fresh, clean water. But many people around the world do not. In fact, water scarcity is the worlds most serious resource problem. How can that be? Water is almost everywhere. More than 70 percent of Earths surface is covered by water. 	most of the fresh water on earth is under the ground	false
Most Americans have plenty of fresh, clean water. But many people around the world do not. In fact, water scarcity is the worlds most serious resource problem. How can that be? Water is almost everywhere. More than 70 percent of Earths surface is covered by water. 	by the year 2025 only onequarter of the worlds people will have enough clean water	false
Richer nations can drill deep wells, build large dams or supply people with water in other ways. In these countries, just about everyone has access to clean running water in their homes. Its no surprise that people in these countries also use the most water. In poorer nations, there is little money to develop water supplies. Look at the people in Figure 21.6. These people must carry water home in a bucket from a distant pump. 	in poorer countries many young children die from waterborne diseases	true
Rainfall varies around the globe. About 40 percent of the land gets very little rain. About the same percentage of the worlds people dont have enough water. You can compare global rainfall with the worldwide freshwater supply at the two URLs below. Drier climates generally have less water for people to use. In some places, people may have less water available to them for an entire year than many Americans use in a single day! How much water is there where you live? Global rainfall: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:World_precip_annual.png Freshwater supply: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:2006_Global_Water_Availability.svg 	drier climates generally have less water for people to use	true
Figure 21.1 shows how people use water worldwide. The greatest use is for agriculture and then industry. Municipal use is last, but is also important. Municipal use refers to water used by homes and businesses in communities. 	because of conservation we use less water today than we did a century ago	false
The water Americans get from their faucets is generally safe. This water has been treated and purified. But at least 20 percent of the worlds people do not have clean drinking water. Their only choice may be to drink water straight from a river (see Figure 21.8). If the river is polluted with wastes, it will contain bacteria and other organisms that cause disease. Almost 9 out of 10 cases of disease worldwide are caused by unsafe drinking water. Diseases from unsafe drinking water are the leading cause of death in young children. 	water is safe to drink as long as it is moving water	false
Most Americans have plenty of fresh, clean water. But many people around the world do not. In fact, water scarcity is the worlds most serious resource problem. How can that be? Water is almost everywhere. More than 70 percent of Earths surface is covered by water. 	worlds most serious resource problem	1. e
Water shortages are common in much of the world. People are most likely to run short of water during droughts. A drought is a period of unusually low rainfall. Human actions have increased how often droughts occur. One way people can help to bring on drought is by cutting down trees. Trees add a lot of water vapor to the air. With fewer trees, the air is drier and droughts are more common. We already use six times as much water today as we did a hundred years ago. As the number of people rises, our need for water will grow. By the year 2025, only half the worlds people will have enough clean water. Water is such a vital resource that serious water shortages may cause other problems. Crops and livestock may die, so people will have less food available. Other uses of water, such as industry, may have to stop. This reduces the jobs people can get and the products they can buy. People and nations may fight over water resources. In extreme cases, people may die from lack of water. The Figure 21.7 shows the global water situation in the 2030s with water stress and water scarcity on the map. 	period of unusually low rainfall	2. d
The water Americans get from their faucets is generally safe. This water has been treated and purified. But at least 20 percent of the worlds people do not have clean drinking water. Their only choice may be to drink water straight from a river (see Figure 21.8). If the river is polluted with wastes, it will contain bacteria and other organisms that cause disease. Almost 9 out of 10 cases of disease worldwide are caused by unsafe drinking water. Diseases from unsafe drinking water are the leading cause of death in young children. 	degree to which water is polluted	3. f
Almost a quarter of the water used worldwide is used in industry. Industries use water for many purposes. Chemical processes need a lot of water. Water is used to generate electricity. An important way that industries use water is to cool machines and power plants. 	any method of providing extra water to plants	4. b
Think about all the ways people use water at home. Besides drinking it, they use it for cooking, bathing, washing dishes, doing laundry, and flushing toilets. The water used inside homes goes down the drain. From there it usually ends up in a sewer system. At the sewage treatment plant, water can be is treated and prepared for reuse. Households may also use water outdoors. If your family has a lawn or garden, you may water them with a hose or sprinkler. You probably use water to wash the car, like the teen in Figure 21.3. Much of the water used outdoors evaporates or runs off into the gutter. The runoff water may end up in storm sewers that flow into a body of water, such as the ocean. 	underground pipe that collects runoff water	5. c
Figure 21.1 shows how people use water worldwide. The greatest use is for agriculture and then industry. Municipal use is last, but is also important. Municipal use refers to water used by homes and businesses in communities. 	greatest use of water worldwide	6. a
There are three main sources of water pollution: 1. Agriculture. 2. Industry. 3. Municipal, or community, sources. 	point source pollution is harder to control	false
There are three main sources of water pollution: 1. Agriculture. 2. Industry. 3. Municipal, or community, sources. 	agricultural pollution can contaminate well water	true
Huge amounts of chemicals, such as fertilizers and pesticides, are applied to farm fields (see Figure 21.10). Some of the chemicals are picked up by rainwater. Runoff then carries the chemicals to nearby rivers or lakes. Dissolved fertilizer causes too much growth of water plants and algae. This can lead to dead zones where nothing can live in lakes and at the mouths of rivers. Some of the chemicals can infiltrate into groundwater. The contaminated water comes up in water wells. If people drink the polluted water, they may get sick. Waste from livestock can also pollute water. The waste contains bacteria and other organisms that cause disease. In fact, more than 40 human diseases can be caused by water polluted with animal waste. Many farms in the U.S. have thousands of animals. These farms produce millions of gallons of waste. The waste is stored in huge lagoons, like the one in Figure 21.11. Unfortunately, many leaks from these lagoons have occurred. Two examples are described below. In North Carolina, 25 million gallons of hog manure spilled into a nearby river. The contaminated water killed 	livestock waste is always stored safely in lagoons	false
There are three main sources of water pollution: 1. Agriculture. 2. Industry. 3. Municipal, or community, sources. 	industrial water pollution commonly includes toxic chemicals such as mercury	true
Municipal refers to the community. Households and businesses in a community are also responsible for polluting the water supply. For example: People apply chemicals to their lawns. The chemicals may be picked up by rainwater. The contaminated runoff enters storm sewers and ends up in nearby rivers or lakes. Underground septic tanks can develop leaks. This lets household sewage seep into groundwater. Municipal sewage treatment plants dump treated wastewater into rivers or lakes. Sometimes the wastewater is not treated enough and contains bacteria or toxic chemicals. 	no harm is done if lawn chemicals are washed into storm sewers	false
There are three main sources of water pollution: 1. Agriculture. 2. Industry. 3. Municipal, or community, sources. 	water pollution contributes to water shortages	true
The oceans are vast. You might think they are too big to be harmed by pollution. But thats not the case. Ocean water is becoming seriously polluted. 	most ocean pollution comes from ships at sea	false
The oceans are vast. You might think they are too big to be harmed by pollution. But thats not the case. Ocean water is becoming seriously polluted. 	most of the pollution in the oceans is carried there by rivers and runoff	true
There are three main sources of water pollution: 1. Agriculture. 2. Industry. 3. Municipal, or community, sources. 	animal waste and fertilizers bring nutrients to nearby water sources	true
The oceans are vast. You might think they are too big to be harmed by pollution. But thats not the case. Ocean water is becoming seriously polluted. 	oil leaks and spills occur only in the oceans	false
There are three main sources of water pollution: 1. Agriculture. 2. Industry. 3. Municipal, or community, sources. 	thermal pollution kills fish by making the water too cold	false
The oceans are vast. You might think they are too big to be harmed by pollution. But thats not the case. Ocean water is becoming seriously polluted. 	water pollution includes any contaminant that gets into lakes streams and oceans	true
The oceans are vast. You might think they are too big to be harmed by pollution. But thats not the case. Ocean water is becoming seriously polluted. 	factory farms with thousands of animals pollute ocean water with animal wastes	true
The oceans are most polluted along coasts. Why do you think thats the case? Of course, its because most pollution enters the oceans from the land. Runoff and rivers carry the majority of pollution into the ocean. Many cities dump their wastewater directly into coastal waters. In some parts of the world, raw sewage and trash may be thrown into the water (see Figure 21.12). Coastal water may become so polluted that people get sick if they swim in it or eat seafood from it. The polluted water may also kill fish and other ocean life. 	in some places people dump trash and raw sewage into the ocean	true
The oceans are vast. You might think they are too big to be harmed by pollution. But thats not the case. Ocean water is becoming seriously polluted. 	if polluted water infiltrates the ground it is no longer a problem	false
There are three main sources of water pollution: 1. Agriculture. 2. Industry. 3. Municipal, or community, sources. 	major cause of water pollution	1.d
There are three main sources of water pollution: 1. Agriculture. 2. Industry. 3. Municipal, or community, sources. 	pollution that enters water in many places	2.a
There are three main sources of water pollution: 1. Agriculture. 2. Industry. 3. Municipal, or community, sources. 	pollution that raises the temperature of water	3.f
The oceans are vast. You might think they are too big to be harmed by pollution. But thats not the case. Ocean water is becoming seriously polluted. 	where ocean pollution is worst	4.e
There are three main sources of water pollution: 1. Agriculture. 2. Industry. 3. Municipal, or community, sources. 	pollution that enters water in just one place	5.c
Pollution that enters water at just one point is called point source pollution. For example, chemicals from a factory might empty into a stream through a pipe or set of pipes (see Figure 21.9). Pollution that enters in many places is called non-point source pollution. This means that the pollution is from multiple sources. With non-point source pollution, runoff may carry the pollution into a body of water. Which type of pollution do you think is harder to control? 	area in a body of water where nothing can live	6.b
Disasters such as rivers burning led to new U.S. laws to protect the water. For example, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) was established, and the Clean Water Act was passed. Now, water is routinely tested. Pollution is tracked to its source, and polluters are forced to fix the problem and clean up the pollution. They are also fined. These consequences have led industries, agriculture, and communities to pollute the water much less than before. 	a burning river helped people realize the need to protect water	true
Disasters such as rivers burning led to new U.S. laws to protect the water. For example, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) was established, and the Clean Water Act was passed. Now, water is routinely tested. Pollution is tracked to its source, and polluters are forced to fix the problem and clean up the pollution. They are also fined. These consequences have led industries, agriculture, and communities to pollute the water much less than before. 	water pollution has been reduced by laws fining polluters	true
Disasters such as rivers burning led to new U.S. laws to protect the water. For example, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) was established, and the Clean Water Act was passed. Now, water is routinely tested. Pollution is tracked to its source, and polluters are forced to fix the problem and clean up the pollution. They are also fined. These consequences have led industries, agriculture, and communities to pollute the water much less than before. 	most water pollution is caused by recreation on the water	false
Water treatment is a series of processes that remove unwanted substances from water. The goal of water treatment is to make the water safe to return to the natural environment or to the human water supply. Treating water for other purposes may not include all the same steps. Thats because water used in agriculture or industry may not have to be as clean as drinking water. You can see how water for drinking is treated in Figure 21.18. Treating drinking water requires at least four processes: 1. Chemicals are added to untreated water. They cause solids in the water to clump together. This is called coagulation. 2. The water is moved to tanks. The clumped solids sink to the bottom of the water. This is called sedimentation. 3. The water is passed through filters that remove smaller particles from the water. This is called filtration. 4. Chlorine is added to the water to kill bacteria and other microbes. This is called disinfection. Finally, the water is pure enough to drink. 	coagulation is used during water treatment to remove chemicals from water	false
Water treatment is a series of processes that remove unwanted substances from water. The goal of water treatment is to make the water safe to return to the natural environment or to the human water supply. Treating water for other purposes may not include all the same steps. Thats because water used in agriculture or industry may not have to be as clean as drinking water. You can see how water for drinking is treated in Figure 21.18. Treating drinking water requires at least four processes: 1. Chemicals are added to untreated water. They cause solids in the water to clump together. This is called coagulation. 2. The water is moved to tanks. The clumped solids sink to the bottom of the water. This is called sedimentation. 3. The water is passed through filters that remove smaller particles from the water. This is called filtration. 4. Chlorine is added to the water to kill bacteria and other microbes. This is called disinfection. Finally, the water is pure enough to drink. 	filters are used during water treatment to remove bacteria from water	false
Conserving water means using less of it. Of course, this mostly applies to people in the wealthy nations that have the most water and also waste the most. 	people in wealthy nations waste more water than people in poor nations	true
Irrigation is the single biggest use of water. Overhead irrigation wastes a lot of water. Drip irrigation wastes a lot less. Figure 21.19 shows a drip irrigation system. Water pipes run over the surface of the ground. Tiny holes in the pipes are placed close to each plant. Water slowly drips out of the holes and soaks into the soil around the plants. Very little of the water evaporates or runs off the ground. 	the single biggest use of water is for industry	false
Its easy to save water at home. If you save even a few gallons a day you can make a big difference over the long run. The best place to start saving water is in the bathroom. Toilet flushing is the single biggest use of water in the home. Showers and baths are the next biggest use. Follow the tips below to save water at home. Install water-saving toilets. They use only about half as much water per flush. A single household can save up to 20,000 gallons a year with this change alone! Take shorter showers. You can get just as clean in 5 minutes as you can in 10. And youll save up to 50 gallons of water each time you shower. Thats thousands of gallons each year. Use low-flow shower heads. They use about half as much water as regular shower heads. They save thousands of gallons of water. Fix leaky shower heads and faucets. All those drips really add up. At one drip per second, more than 6,000 gallons go down the drain in a year per faucet! Dont leave the water running while you brush your teeth. You could save as much as 10 gallons each time you brush. That could add up to 10,000 gallons in a year. Landscape your home with plants that need little water. This could result in a huge savings in water use. Look at the garden in Figure 21.20. It shows that you dont have to sacrifice beauty to save water. 	watersaving toilets use only about half as much water as regular toilets	true
Some communities save water with rationing. Much rationing takes place only during times of drought. During rationing, water may not be used for certain things. For example, communities may ban lawn watering and car washing. People may be fined if they use water in these ways. You can do your part. Follow any bans where you live. 	when communities ration water they ban its use by certain households	false
Water treatment is a series of processes that remove unwanted substances from water. The goal of water treatment is to make the water safe to return to the natural environment or to the human water supply. Treating water for other purposes may not include all the same steps. Thats because water used in agriculture or industry may not have to be as clean as drinking water. You can see how water for drinking is treated in Figure 21.18. Treating drinking water requires at least four processes: 1. Chemicals are added to untreated water. They cause solids in the water to clump together. This is called coagulation. 2. The water is moved to tanks. The clumped solids sink to the bottom of the water. This is called sedimentation. 3. The water is passed through filters that remove smaller particles from the water. This is called filtration. 4. Chlorine is added to the water to kill bacteria and other microbes. This is called disinfection. Finally, the water is pure enough to drink. 	chemicals are added to untreated water to cause solids to clump together	true
In the mid 1900s, people were startled to see the Cuyahoga River in Cleveland, Ohio, burst into flames! The river was so polluted with oil and other industrial wastes that it was flammable. Nothing could live in it. You can see the Cuyahoga River in Figure 21.16 	cleaning the ocean of pollutants is difficult because the ocean is so vast	true
In the mid 1900s, people were startled to see the Cuyahoga River in Cleveland, Ohio, burst into flames! The river was so polluted with oil and other industrial wastes that it was flammable. Nothing could live in it. You can see the Cuyahoga River in Figure 21.16 	it is easier to clean water that has become polluted than to keep it from becoming polluted	false
Water treatment is a series of processes that remove unwanted substances from water. The goal of water treatment is to make the water safe to return to the natural environment or to the human water supply. Treating water for other purposes may not include all the same steps. Thats because water used in agriculture or industry may not have to be as clean as drinking water. You can see how water for drinking is treated in Figure 21.18. Treating drinking water requires at least four processes: 1. Chemicals are added to untreated water. They cause solids in the water to clump together. This is called coagulation. 2. The water is moved to tanks. The clumped solids sink to the bottom of the water. This is called sedimentation. 3. The water is passed through filters that remove smaller particles from the water. This is called filtration. 4. Chlorine is added to the water to kill bacteria and other microbes. This is called disinfection. Finally, the water is pure enough to drink. 	water for drinking medicine agriculture and water parks is all purified to the same quality	false
In the mid 1900s, people were startled to see the Cuyahoga River in Cleveland, Ohio, burst into flames! The river was so polluted with oil and other industrial wastes that it was flammable. Nothing could live in it. You can see the Cuyahoga River in Figure 21.16 	wastewater contains hundreds of contaminants	true
Irrigation is the single biggest use of water. Overhead irrigation wastes a lot of water. Drip irrigation wastes a lot less. Figure 21.19 shows a drip irrigation system. Water pipes run over the surface of the ground. Tiny holes in the pipes are placed close to each plant. Water slowly drips out of the holes and soaks into the soil around the plants. Very little of the water evaporates or runs off the ground. 	in a wastewater treatment plant water is treated in one single process	false
Water treatment is a series of processes that remove unwanted substances from water. The goal of water treatment is to make the water safe to return to the natural environment or to the human water supply. Treating water for other purposes may not include all the same steps. Thats because water used in agriculture or industry may not have to be as clean as drinking water. You can see how water for drinking is treated in Figure 21.18. Treating drinking water requires at least four processes: 1. Chemicals are added to untreated water. They cause solids in the water to clump together. This is called coagulation. 2. The water is moved to tanks. The clumped solids sink to the bottom of the water. This is called sedimentation. 3. The water is passed through filters that remove smaller particles from the water. This is called filtration. 4. Chlorine is added to the water to kill bacteria and other microbes. This is called disinfection. Finally, the water is pure enough to drink. 	process in water treatment in which small particles are separated from water	1.e
Water treatment is a series of processes that remove unwanted substances from water. The goal of water treatment is to make the water safe to return to the natural environment or to the human water supply. Treating water for other purposes may not include all the same steps. Thats because water used in agriculture or industry may not have to be as clean as drinking water. You can see how water for drinking is treated in Figure 21.18. Treating drinking water requires at least four processes: 1. Chemicals are added to untreated water. They cause solids in the water to clump together. This is called coagulation. 2. The water is moved to tanks. The clumped solids sink to the bottom of the water. This is called sedimentation. 3. The water is passed through filters that remove smaller particles from the water. This is called filtration. 4. Chlorine is added to the water to kill bacteria and other microbes. This is called disinfection. Finally, the water is pure enough to drink. 	process in water treatment in which large particles settle to the bottom of the water	2.d
Water treatment is a series of processes that remove unwanted substances from water. The goal of water treatment is to make the water safe to return to the natural environment or to the human water supply. Treating water for other purposes may not include all the same steps. Thats because water used in agriculture or industry may not have to be as clean as drinking water. You can see how water for drinking is treated in Figure 21.18. Treating drinking water requires at least four processes: 1. Chemicals are added to untreated water. They cause solids in the water to clump together. This is called coagulation. 2. The water is moved to tanks. The clumped solids sink to the bottom of the water. This is called sedimentation. 3. The water is passed through filters that remove smaller particles from the water. This is called filtration. 4. Chlorine is added to the water to kill bacteria and other microbes. This is called disinfection. Finally, the water is pure enough to drink. 	series of processes to improve the quality of water	3.a
Water treatment is a series of processes that remove unwanted substances from water. The goal of water treatment is to make the water safe to return to the natural environment or to the human water supply. Treating water for other purposes may not include all the same steps. Thats because water used in agriculture or industry may not have to be as clean as drinking water. You can see how water for drinking is treated in Figure 21.18. Treating drinking water requires at least four processes: 1. Chemicals are added to untreated water. They cause solids in the water to clump together. This is called coagulation. 2. The water is moved to tanks. The clumped solids sink to the bottom of the water. This is called sedimentation. 3. The water is passed through filters that remove smaller particles from the water. This is called filtration. 4. Chlorine is added to the water to kill bacteria and other microbes. This is called disinfection. Finally, the water is pure enough to drink. 	process in water treatment in which chlorine is added to water	4.g
In the mid 1900s, people were startled to see the Cuyahoga River in Cleveland, Ohio, burst into flames! The river was so polluted with oil and other industrial wastes that it was flammable. Nothing could live in it. You can see the Cuyahoga River in Figure 21.16 	preserving a resource by using less of it	5.c
Conserving water means using less of it. Of course, this mostly applies to people in the wealthy nations that have the most water and also waste the most. 	contamination with chemicals waste or other harmful substances	6.b
Water treatment is a series of processes that remove unwanted substances from water. The goal of water treatment is to make the water safe to return to the natural environment or to the human water supply. Treating water for other purposes may not include all the same steps. Thats because water used in agriculture or industry may not have to be as clean as drinking water. You can see how water for drinking is treated in Figure 21.18. Treating drinking water requires at least four processes: 1. Chemicals are added to untreated water. They cause solids in the water to clump together. This is called coagulation. 2. The water is moved to tanks. The clumped solids sink to the bottom of the water. This is called sedimentation. 3. The water is passed through filters that remove smaller particles from the water. This is called filtration. 4. Chlorine is added to the water to kill bacteria and other microbes. This is called disinfection. Finally, the water is pure enough to drink. 	process in water treatment in which solids in water clump together	7.f
There are two basic types of pollutants in air. They are known as primary pollutants and secondary pollutants. 	type of pollutant that forms when other pollutants undergo chemical reactions	1.g
There are two basic types of pollutants in air. They are known as primary pollutants and secondary pollutants. 	primary pollutant that is a carbon compound such as methane	2.d
Secondary pollutants form when primary pollutants undergo chemical reactions after they are released. Many occur as part of photochemical smog. This type of smog is seen as a brown haze in the air. Photochemical smog forms when certain pollutants react together in the presence of sunlight. You can see smog hanging in the air over San Francisco in Figure 22.2. Photochemical smog consists mainly of ozone (O3 ). The ozone in smog is the same compound as the ozone in the ozone layer,(O3 ). But ozone in smog is found near the ground. Figure 22.3 shows how it forms. When nitrogen oxides and VOCs are heated by the Sun, they lose oxygen atoms. The oxygen atoms combine with molecules of oxygen to form ozone. Smog ozone is harmful to humans and other living things. 	type of pollutant that enters the air directly	3.c
Primary pollutants enter the air directly. Some are released by natural processes, like ash from volcanoes. Most are released by human activities. They pour into the air from vehicles and smokestacks. Several of these pollutants are described below. Carbon oxides include carbon monoxide (CO) and carbon dioxide (CO2 ). Carbon oxides are released when fossil fuels burn. Nitrogen oxides include nitric oxide (NO) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2 ). Nitrogen oxides form when nitrogen and oxygen combine at high temperatures. This occurs in hot exhausts from vehicles, factories, and power plants. Sulfur oxides include sulfur dioxide (SO2 ) and sulfur trioxide (SO3 ). Sulfur oxides are produced when sulfur and oxygen combine. This happens when coal burns. Coal can contain up to 10 percent sulfur. Toxic heavy metals include mercury and lead. Mercury is used in some industrial processes. It is also found in fluorescent light bulbs. Lead was once widely used in gasoline, paint, and pipes. It is still found in some products. Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are carbon compounds such as methane. VOCs are released in many human activities, such as raising livestock. Livestock wastes produce a lot of methane. Particulates are solid particles. These particles may be ash, dust, or even animal wastes. Many are released when fossil fuels burn (see Figure 22.1). 	solid particle in the air	4.e
There are two basic types of pollutants in air. They are known as primary pollutants and secondary pollutants. 	measure of the pollutants in air	5.a
There are two basic types of pollutants in air. They are known as primary pollutants and secondary pollutants. 	brown haze that forms in air when certain pollutants react together in sunlight	6.b
There are two basic types of pollutants in air. They are known as primary pollutants and secondary pollutants. 	primary component of photochemical smog	7.f
Poor air quality started to become a serious problem after the Industrial Revolution. The machines in factories burned coal. This released a lot of pollutants into the air. After 1900, motor vehicles became common. Cars and trucks burn gasoline, which adds greatly to air pollution. 	before the industrial revolution there was very little air pollution that wasnt natural	true
Most pollutants enter the air when fossil fuels burn. Some are released when forests burn. Others evaporate into the air. 	burning fossil fuels releases carbon dioxide into the atmosphere	true
Most pollutants enter the air when fossil fuels burn. Some are released when forests burn. Others evaporate into the air. 	about 150 million tons of pollutants enter into the atmosphere every year	true
Air quality is a measure of the pollutants in the air. More pollutants mean poorer air quality. Air quality, in turn, depends on many factors. Some natural processes add pollutants to the air. For example, forest fires and volcanoes add carbon dioxide and soot. In dry areas, the air often contains dust. However, human actions cause the most air pollution. The single biggest cause is fossil fuel burning. 	the clean air act regulates carbon dioxide	false
Secondary pollutants form when primary pollutants undergo chemical reactions after they are released. Many occur as part of photochemical smog. This type of smog is seen as a brown haze in the air. Photochemical smog forms when certain pollutants react together in the presence of sunlight. You can see smog hanging in the air over San Francisco in Figure 22.2. Photochemical smog consists mainly of ozone (O3 ). The ozone in smog is the same compound as the ozone in the ozone layer,(O3 ). But ozone in smog is found near the ground. Figure 22.3 shows how it forms. When nitrogen oxides and VOCs are heated by the Sun, they lose oxygen atoms. The oxygen atoms combine with molecules of oxygen to form ozone. Smog ozone is harmful to humans and other living things. 	ozone in the lower atmosphere protects life from uv radiation	false
At the same time, many U.S. cities had air pollution problems. Some of the worst were in California. Cars were becoming more popular. Oil refineries and power plants also polluted the air. Mountain ranges trapped polluted air over cities. The California sunshine caused chemical reactions among the pollutants. These reactions produced many more harmful compounds. 	air pollution is caused completely by human actions	false
By 1970, it was clear that something needed to be done to protect air quality. In the U.S., the Clean Air Act was passed. It limits what can be released into the air. As a result, the air in the U.S. is much cleaner now than it was 50 years ago. But air pollution has not gone away. Vehicles, factories, and power plants still release more than 150 million tons of pollutants into the air each year. 	the air in the us is more polluted now than it was 50 years ago	false
VOCs enter the air by evaporation. VOCs are found in many products, like paints and petroleum products. Methane is a VOC that evaporates from livestock waste and landfills. 	livestock wastes pollute the air with methane	true
Air quality is a measure of the pollutants in the air. More pollutants mean poorer air quality. Air quality, in turn, depends on many factors. Some natural processes add pollutants to the air. For example, forest fires and volcanoes add carbon dioxide and soot. In dry areas, the air often contains dust. However, human actions cause the most air pollution. The single biggest cause is fossil fuel burning. 	animal wastes add particulates to the atmosphere	true
Primary pollutants enter the air directly. Some are released by natural processes, like ash from volcanoes. Most are released by human activities. They pour into the air from vehicles and smokestacks. Several of these pollutants are described below. Carbon oxides include carbon monoxide (CO) and carbon dioxide (CO2 ). Carbon oxides are released when fossil fuels burn. Nitrogen oxides include nitric oxide (NO) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2 ). Nitrogen oxides form when nitrogen and oxygen combine at high temperatures. This occurs in hot exhausts from vehicles, factories, and power plants. Sulfur oxides include sulfur dioxide (SO2 ) and sulfur trioxide (SO3 ). Sulfur oxides are produced when sulfur and oxygen combine. This happens when coal burns. Coal can contain up to 10 percent sulfur. Toxic heavy metals include mercury and lead. Mercury is used in some industrial processes. It is also found in fluorescent light bulbs. Lead was once widely used in gasoline, paint, and pipes. It is still found in some products. Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are carbon compounds such as methane. VOCs are released in many human activities, such as raising livestock. Livestock wastes produce a lot of methane. Particulates are solid particles. These particles may be ash, dust, or even animal wastes. Many are released when fossil fuels burn (see Figure 22.1). 	particulates include only particles big enough to be seen by the unaided eye	false
There are two basic types of pollutants in air. They are known as primary pollutants and secondary pollutants. 	ozone forms when certain air pollutants are heated by direct sunlight	true
VOCs enter the air by evaporation. VOCs are found in many products, like paints and petroleum products. Methane is a VOC that evaporates from livestock waste and landfills. 	paints and petroleum products release volatile organic compounds	true
By 1970, it was clear that something needed to be done to protect air quality. In the U.S., the Clean Air Act was passed. It limits what can be released into the air. As a result, the air in the U.S. is much cleaner now than it was 50 years ago. But air pollution has not gone away. Vehicles, factories, and power plants still release more than 150 million tons of pollutants into the air each year. 	air pollution contributes to global warming	true
At the same time, many U.S. cities had air pollution problems. Some of the worst were in California. Cars were becoming more popular. Oil refineries and power plants also polluted the air. Mountain ranges trapped polluted air over cities. The California sunshine caused chemical reactions among the pollutants. These reactions produced many more harmful compounds. 	in california mountain ranges can trap polluted air over cities	true
There are two basic types of pollutants in air. They are known as primary pollutants and secondary pollutants. 	all primary pollutants come from directly from motor vehicles and smokestacks	false
All air pollutants are harmful. Thats why theyre called pollutants. Some air pollutants damage the environment as well as the health of living things. The type of damage depends on the pollutant. 	type of pollutant that is usually higher in indoor than outdoor air	1.e
Heavy metals, such as mercury and lead, are toxic to living things. They can enter food chains from the atmosphere. The metals build up in the tissues of organisms by bioaccumulation. Bioaccumulation is illustrated in Figure 22.8. As heavy metals are passed up a food chain they accumulate. Imagine a low-level consumer eating a producer. That consumer takes in all of the heavy metals from all of the producers that it eats. Then a higher-level consumer eats it and accumulates all the heavy metals from all of the lower-level consumers that it eats. In this way, heavy metals may accumulate. At high levels in the food chain, the heavy metals may be quite become quite concentrated. The higher up a food chain that humans eat, the greater the levels of toxic metals they take in. Thats why people should avoid eating too much of large fish such as tuna. Tuna are predators near the top of their food chains. They have been shown to contain high levels of mercury. In people, heavy metals can damage the brain and other organs. Unborn babies and young children are most affected. Thats because their organs are still developing. 	buildup of heavy metals in the tissues of organisms	2.b
Ozone near the ground harms human health. But the ozone layer in the stratosphere protects us from solar rays. Thats why people were alarmed in the 1980s to learn that there was a hole in the ozone layer. 	harmful radiation blocked by the ozone layer	3.g
All air pollutants are harmful. Thats why theyre called pollutants. Some air pollutants damage the environment as well as the health of living things. The type of damage depends on the pollutant. 	gas in smog that is harmful to plants and people	4.a
All air pollutants are harmful. Thats why theyre called pollutants. Some air pollutants damage the environment as well as the health of living things. The type of damage depends on the pollutant. 	type of air pollutant that destroys the ozone layer	5.f
All air pollutants are harmful. Thats why theyre called pollutants. Some air pollutants damage the environment as well as the health of living things. The type of damage depends on the pollutant. 	type of air pollutant that blocks sunlight from reaching earths surface	6.c
Carbon monoxide (CO) is toxic to both plants and animals. CO is deadly to people in a confined space, such as a closed home. Carbon monoxide is odorless and colorless, so people cant tell when they are breathing it. Thats why homes should have carbon monoxide detectors. You can see one in Figure 22.7. 	odorless colorless gas that is deadly to people in a confined space	7.d
With less ozone in the stratosphere, more UV rays reach the ground. More UV rays increase skin cancer rates. Just a 1 percent loss of ozone causes a 5 percent increase in skin cancer. More UV rays also harm plants and phytoplankton. As a result, they produce less food. This may affect entire ecosystems. 	lung cancer rates are increasing entirely due to more people smoking	false
Ozone near the ground harms human health. But the ozone layer in the stratosphere protects us from solar rays. Thats why people were alarmed in the 1980s to learn that there was a hole in the ozone layer. 	ozone loss near the north and south poles is about the same	false
Both nitrogen and sulfur oxides are toxic to humans. These compounds can cause lung diseases or make them worse. Nitrogen and sulfur oxides form acid rain, which is described below. 	on a ph scale numbers below 7 are basic	false
Ozone near the ground harms human health. But the ozone layer in the stratosphere protects us from solar rays. Thats why people were alarmed in the 1980s to learn that there was a hole in the ozone layer. 	particulates reduce the amount of sunshine that reaches the ground	true
Both nitrogen and sulfur oxides are toxic to humans. These compounds can cause lung diseases or make them worse. Nitrogen and sulfur oxides form acid rain, which is described below. 	acid rain is produced by nitrogen and sulfuroxides in the atmosphere	true
Particulates cause lung diseases. They can also increase the risk of heart disease and the number of asthma attacks. Particulates block sunlight from reaching Earths surface. This means there is less energy for photosynthesis. Less photosynthesis means that plants and phytoplankton produce less food. This affects whole ecosystems. 	breathing polluted air increases the risk of lung cancer	true
The ozone in smog may damage plants. The effects of ozone add up over time. Plants such as trees, which normally live a long time, are most affected. Entire forests may die out if ozone levels are very high. Other plants, including crop plants, may also be damaged by ozone. You can see evidence of ozone damage in Figure 22.5. The ozone in smog is also harmful to human health. Figure 22.6 shows the levels of ozone to watch out for. Some people are especially sensitive to ozone. They can be harmed by levels of ozone that would not affect most other people. These people include those with lung or heart problems. 	ozone in smog can kill entire forests	true
The ozone in smog may damage plants. The effects of ozone add up over time. Plants such as trees, which normally live a long time, are most affected. Entire forests may die out if ozone levels are very high. Other plants, including crop plants, may also be damaged by ozone. You can see evidence of ozone damage in Figure 22.5. The ozone in smog is also harmful to human health. Figure 22.6 shows the levels of ozone to watch out for. Some people are especially sensitive to ozone. They can be harmed by levels of ozone that would not affect most other people. These people include those with lung or heart problems. 	some people are more sensitive to smog than others	true
Heavy metals, such as mercury and lead, are toxic to living things. They can enter food chains from the atmosphere. The metals build up in the tissues of organisms by bioaccumulation. Bioaccumulation is illustrated in Figure 22.8. As heavy metals are passed up a food chain they accumulate. Imagine a low-level consumer eating a producer. That consumer takes in all of the heavy metals from all of the producers that it eats. Then a higher-level consumer eats it and accumulates all the heavy metals from all of the lower-level consumers that it eats. In this way, heavy metals may accumulate. At high levels in the food chain, the heavy metals may be quite become quite concentrated. The higher up a food chain that humans eat, the greater the levels of toxic metals they take in. Thats why people should avoid eating too much of large fish such as tuna. Tuna are predators near the top of their food chains. They have been shown to contain high levels of mercury. In people, heavy metals can damage the brain and other organs. Unborn babies and young children are most affected. Thats because their organs are still developing. 	small fish are likely to contain higher levels of lead than large fish	false
VOCs are toxic to humans and other living things. In people, they can cause a wide range of problems, from eye and nose irritation to brain damage and cancer. Levels of VOCs are often higher indoors than out. Thats because they are released by products such as paints, cleaning solutions, and building materials. How might you reduce your exposure to VOCs? 	exposure to heavy metals can cause brain damage in unborn babies	true
Acid rain is rain that has a pH less than 5 (see Figure 22.9). The pH of normal rain is 5.6. Its slightly acidic because carbon dioxide in the air dissolves in rain. This forms carbonic acid, a weak acid. 	acid rain contains higherthannormal levels of carbonic acid	false
Both nitrogen and sulfur oxides are toxic to humans. These compounds can cause lung diseases or make them worse. Nitrogen and sulfur oxides form acid rain, which is described below. 	acid rain damages structures but does not harm living things	false
Ozone near the ground harms human health. But the ozone layer in the stratosphere protects us from solar rays. Thats why people were alarmed in the 1980s to learn that there was a hole in the ozone layer. 	the hole in the ozone layer shows that air quality is improving	false
Ozone near the ground harms human health. But the ozone layer in the stratosphere protects us from solar rays. Thats why people were alarmed in the 1980s to learn that there was a hole in the ozone layer. 	the ozone hole is bigger in some seasons than in others	true
All air pollutants are harmful. Thats why theyre called pollutants. Some air pollutants damage the environment as well as the health of living things. The type of damage depends on the pollutant. 	groundlevel ozone is especially harmful to people with heart disease	true
The problems of ozone loss and global warming were unknown in 1970. When they were discovered, worldwide efforts were made to reduce CFCs and carbon dioxide emissions. 	since the passage of the clean air act emissions of the six major pollutants have decreased by 50	true
The problems of ozone loss and global warming were unknown in 1970. When they were discovered, worldwide efforts were made to reduce CFCs and carbon dioxide emissions. 	removing particles from emissions is a difficult process	true
The Montreal Protocol is a worldwide agreement on air pollution. It focuses on CFCs. It was signed by many countries in 1987. It controls almost 100 chemicals that can damage the ozone layer. Its aim is to return the ozone layer to its normal state. The Montreal Protocol has been effective in controlling CFCs. By 1995, few CFCs were still being used. But the ozone hole kept growing for several years after that because of the CFCs already in the atmosphere. It peaked in 2006. Since then, it has been somewhat smaller. 	destruction by ozone creates the ozone hole	false
The problems of ozone loss and global warming were unknown in 1970. When they were discovered, worldwide efforts were made to reduce CFCs and carbon dioxide emissions. 	efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions have been successful	false
The Montreal Protocol is a worldwide agreement on air pollution. It focuses on CFCs. It was signed by many countries in 1987. It controls almost 100 chemicals that can damage the ozone layer. Its aim is to return the ozone layer to its normal state. The Montreal Protocol has been effective in controlling CFCs. By 1995, few CFCs were still being used. But the ozone hole kept growing for several years after that because of the CFCs already in the atmosphere. It peaked in 2006. Since then, it has been somewhat smaller. 	without the montreal protocol skin cancer cases in the us would have been higher	true
The problems of ozone loss and global warming were unknown in 1970. When they were discovered, worldwide efforts were made to reduce CFCs and carbon dioxide emissions. 	the clean air act was passed in order to reduce global warming	false
There are two basic types of strategies for reducing pollution from fossil fuels: 1. Use less fossil fuel to begin with. 2. When fossil fuels must be used, prevent the pollution from entering the air. 	because of the clean air act air pollution has been eliminated completely	false
The Montreal Protocol is a worldwide agreement on air pollution. It focuses on CFCs. It was signed by many countries in 1987. It controls almost 100 chemicals that can damage the ozone layer. Its aim is to return the ozone layer to its normal state. The Montreal Protocol has been effective in controlling CFCs. By 1995, few CFCs were still being used. But the ozone hole kept growing for several years after that because of the CFCs already in the atmosphere. It peaked in 2006. Since then, it has been somewhat smaller. 	pollution by ozone was reduced at least 50 percent by the montreal protocol	false
We can reduce our use of fossil fuels in several ways: Conserve fossil fuels. For example, turning out lights when we arent using them saves electricity. Why does this help? A lot of the electricity we use comes from coal-burning power plants. Use fossil fuels more efficiently. For example, driving a fuel-efficient car lets you go farther on each gallon of gas. This can add up to a big savings in fossil fuel use. Change to alternative energy sources that produce little or no air pollution. For example, hybrid cars run on electricity that would be wasted during braking. These cars use gas only as a backup fuel. As a result, they produce just 10 percent of the air pollution produced by cars that run only on gas. Cars that run on hydrogen and produce no pollution at all have also been developed (see Figure 22.14). 	hydrogen cars produce about 10 percent of the air pollution of gasburning cars	false
Some of the pollutants from fossil fuels can be filtered out of exhaust before it is released into the air. Other pollutants can be changed to harmless compounds before they are released. Two widely used technologies are scrubbers and catalytic converters. Scrubbers are used in factories and power plants. They remove particulates and waste gases from exhaust before it is released to the air. You can see how a scrubber works in Figure 22.15. Catalytic converters are used on motor vehicles. They break down pollutants in exhaust to non-toxic com- pounds. For example, they change nitrogen oxides to harmless nitrogen and oxygen gasses. 	some scrubbers use steam to remove pollutants from exhaust	true
The Montreal Protocol is a worldwide agreement on air pollution. It focuses on CFCs. It was signed by many countries in 1987. It controls almost 100 chemicals that can damage the ozone layer. Its aim is to return the ozone layer to its normal state. The Montreal Protocol has been effective in controlling CFCs. By 1995, few CFCs were still being used. But the ozone hole kept growing for several years after that because of the CFCs already in the atmosphere. It peaked in 2006. Since then, it has been somewhat smaller. 	the kyoto protocol has been more successful than the montreal protocol	false
The Montreal Protocol is a worldwide agreement on air pollution. It focuses on CFCs. It was signed by many countries in 1987. It controls almost 100 chemicals that can damage the ozone layer. Its aim is to return the ozone layer to its normal state. The Montreal Protocol has been effective in controlling CFCs. By 1995, few CFCs were still being used. But the ozone hole kept growing for several years after that because of the CFCs already in the atmosphere. It peaked in 2006. Since then, it has been somewhat smaller. 	the size of the hole in the ozone layer has gotten somewhat smaller since 2006	true
The problems of ozone loss and global warming were unknown in 1970. When they were discovered, worldwide efforts were made to reduce CFCs and carbon dioxide emissions. 	capandtrade systems were developed to reduce the use of cfcs	false
The problems of ozone loss and global warming were unknown in 1970. When they were discovered, worldwide efforts were made to reduce CFCs and carbon dioxide emissions. 	carbon is sequestered naturally by forests	true
The Kyoto Protocol is another worldwide agreement on air pollution. It was passed in 1997. The Protocol focuses on controlling greenhouse gas emissions. Its aim is to control global warming. Carbon dioxide is the main greenhouse gas causing global warming. There are several possible ways to reduce carbon dioxide emissions. They include cap-and-trade systems, carbon taxes, and carbon sequestration In a cap-and-trade system, each nation is given a cap, or upper limit, on carbon dioxide emissions. If a nation needs to go over its cap, it can trade with another nation that is below its cap. Figure 22.16 shows how this works. Carbon taxes are taxes placed on gasoline and other products that produce carbon dioxide. The taxes encourage people to use less fossil fuel, which reduces carbon dioxide emissions. Carbon sequestration is any way of removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and storing it in another form. Carbon is sequestered naturally by forests. Trees take in carbon dioxide for photosynthesis. Artificial methods of sequestering carbon underground are being researched. The Kyoto Protocol has not been as successful as the Montreal Protocol. One reason is that the worlds biggest producer of greenhouse gases, the U.S., did not sign the Kyoto Protocol. Of the nations that signed it, few are 	the worlds greatest producer of greenhouse gases is the us	true
The Montreal Protocol is a worldwide agreement on air pollution. It focuses on CFCs. It was signed by many countries in 1987. It controls almost 100 chemicals that can damage the ozone layer. Its aim is to return the ozone layer to its normal state. The Montreal Protocol has been effective in controlling CFCs. By 1995, few CFCs were still being used. But the ozone hole kept growing for several years after that because of the CFCs already in the atmosphere. It peaked in 2006. Since then, it has been somewhat smaller. 	worldwide agreement on air pollution that focuses on cfcs	1.e
Some of the pollutants from fossil fuels can be filtered out of exhaust before it is released into the air. Other pollutants can be changed to harmless compounds before they are released. Two widely used technologies are scrubbers and catalytic converters. Scrubbers are used in factories and power plants. They remove particulates and waste gases from exhaust before it is released to the air. You can see how a scrubber works in Figure 22.15. Catalytic converters are used on motor vehicles. They break down pollutants in exhaust to non-toxic com- pounds. For example, they change nitrogen oxides to harmless nitrogen and oxygen gasses. 	device that changes pollutants in exhaust gases to nontoxic compounds	2.b
The Montreal Protocol is a worldwide agreement on air pollution. It focuses on CFCs. It was signed by many countries in 1987. It controls almost 100 chemicals that can damage the ozone layer. Its aim is to return the ozone layer to its normal state. The Montreal Protocol has been effective in controlling CFCs. By 1995, few CFCs were still being used. But the ozone hole kept growing for several years after that because of the CFCs already in the atmosphere. It peaked in 2006. Since then, it has been somewhat smaller. 	worldwide agreement on air pollution that focuses on greenhouse gases	3.f
Some of the pollutants from fossil fuels can be filtered out of exhaust before it is released into the air. Other pollutants can be changed to harmless compounds before they are released. Two widely used technologies are scrubbers and catalytic converters. Scrubbers are used in factories and power plants. They remove particulates and waste gases from exhaust before it is released to the air. You can see how a scrubber works in Figure 22.15. Catalytic converters are used on motor vehicles. They break down pollutants in exhaust to non-toxic com- pounds. For example, they change nitrogen oxides to harmless nitrogen and oxygen gasses. 	device that filters pollutants from exhaust gases	4.a
Some of the pollutants from fossil fuels can be filtered out of exhaust before it is released into the air. Other pollutants can be changed to harmless compounds before they are released. Two widely used technologies are scrubbers and catalytic converters. Scrubbers are used in factories and power plants. They remove particulates and waste gases from exhaust before it is released to the air. You can see how a scrubber works in Figure 22.15. Catalytic converters are used on motor vehicles. They break down pollutants in exhaust to non-toxic com- pounds. For example, they change nitrogen oxides to harmless nitrogen and oxygen gasses. 	us law that regulates six major air pollutants	5.g
The problems of ozone loss and global warming were unknown in 1970. When they were discovered, worldwide efforts were made to reduce CFCs and carbon dioxide emissions. 	removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and storing it in another form	6.d
The problems of ozone loss and global warming were unknown in 1970. When they were discovered, worldwide efforts were made to reduce CFCs and carbon dioxide emissions. 	system of limits and allowances on carbon dioxide emissions that can be exchanged between nations	7.c
Light is one type of electromagnetic radiation. Light is energy that travels in the form of an electromagnetic wave. Figure 23.2 shows a diagram of an electromagnetic wave. An electromagnetic (EM) wave has two parts: an electric field and a magnetic field. The electric and magnetic fields vibrate up and down, which makes the wave. The wavelength is the horizontal distance between two of the same points on the wave, like wave crest to wave crest. A waves frequency measures the number of wavelengths that pass a given point every second. As wavelength increases, frequency decreases. This means that as wavelengths get shorter, more waves move past a particular spot in the same amount of time. 	light travels as vibrating electric and magnetic fields	true
Earth is just a tiny speck in the universe. Our planet is surrounded by lots of space. Light travels across empty space. Astronomers can study light from stars to learn about the universe. Light is the visible part of the electromagnetic spectrum. Astronomers use the light that comes to us to gather information about the universe. 	all telescopes work by gathering and focusing visible light	false
Visible light is the part of the electromagnetic spectrum (Figure 23.3) that humans can see. Visible light includes all the colors of the rainbow. Each color is determined by its wavelength. Visible light ranges from violet wavelengths of 400 nanometers (nm) through red at 700 nm. There are parts of the electromagnetic spectrum that humans cannot see. This radiation exists all around you. You just cant see it! Every star, including our Sun, emits radiation of many wavelengths. Astronomers can learn a lot from studying the details of the spectrum of radiation from a star. Many extremely interesting objects cant be seen with the unaided eye. Astronomers use telescopes to see objects at wavelengths all across the electromagnetic spectrum. Some very hot stars emit light primarily at ultraviolet wavelengths. There are extremely hot objects that emit X-rays and even gamma rays. Some very cool stars shine mostly in the infrared light wavelengths. Radio waves come from the faintest, most distant objects. To learn more about stars spectra, visit 	visible light includes all the colors of the rainbow	true
Visible light is the part of the electromagnetic spectrum (Figure 23.3) that humans can see. Visible light includes all the colors of the rainbow. Each color is determined by its wavelength. Visible light ranges from violet wavelengths of 400 nanometers (nm) through red at 700 nm. There are parts of the electromagnetic spectrum that humans cannot see. This radiation exists all around you. You just cant see it! Every star, including our Sun, emits radiation of many wavelengths. Astronomers can learn a lot from studying the details of the spectrum of radiation from a star. Many extremely interesting objects cant be seen with the unaided eye. Astronomers use telescopes to see objects at wavelengths all across the electromagnetic spectrum. Some very hot stars emit light primarily at ultraviolet wavelengths. There are extremely hot objects that emit X-rays and even gamma rays. Some very cool stars shine mostly in the infrared light wavelengths. Radio waves come from the faintest, most distant objects. To learn more about stars spectra, visit 	the only radiation emitted by the sun is visible light	false
When we look at stars and galaxies, we are seeing over great distances. More importantly, we are also seeing back in time. When we see a distant galaxy, we are actually seeing how the galaxy used to look. For example, the Andromeda Galaxy, shown in Figure 23.1, is about 2.5 million light-years from Earth. When you see an image of the galaxy what are you seeing? You are seeing the galaxy as it was 2.5 million years ago! Since scientists can look back in time they can better understand the Universes history. Check out http://science.n 	the light from distant stars is very old by the time it reaches earth	true
Humans have been making and using magnifying lenses for thousands of years. The first telescope was built by Galileo in 1608. His telescope used two lenses to make distant objects appear both nearer and larger. Telescopes that use lenses to bend light are called refracting telescopes, or refractors (Figure 23.4). The earliest telescopes were all refractors. Many amateur astronomers still use refractors today. Refractors are good for viewing details within our solar system. Craters on the surface of Earths Moon or the rings around Saturn are two such details. Around 1670, Sir Isaac Newton built a different kind of telescope. Newtons telescope used curved mirrors instead of lenses to focus light. This type of telescope is called a reflecting telescope, or reflector (see Figure 23.5). The mirrors in a reflecting telescope are much lighter than the heavy glass lenses in a refractor. This is important because a refracting telescope must be much stronger to support the heavy glass. Its much easier to precisely make mirrors than to precisely make glass lenses. For that reason, reflectors can be made larger than refractors. Larger telescopes can collect more light. This means that they can study dimmer or more distant objects. The largest optical telescopes in the world today are reflectors. Telescopes can also be made to use both lenses and mirrors. For more on how telescopes were developed, visit http://galileo.rice.edu/sci/instruments/telescope.html . 	the largest optical telescopes today are refracting telescopes	false
Radio telescopes collect radio waves. These telescopes are even larger telescopes than reflectors. Radio telescopes look a lot like satellite dishes. In fact, both are designed to collect and focus radio waves or microwaves from space. The largest single radio telescope in the world is at the Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico (see Figure 23.6). This telescope is located in a natural sinkhole. The sinkhole formed when water flowing underground dissolved the limestone. This telescope would collapse under its own weight if it were not supported by the ground. There is a big disadvantage to this design. The telescope can only observe the part of the sky that happens to be overhead at a given time. A group of radio telescopes can be linked together with a computer. The telescopes observe the same object. The computer then combines the data from each telescope. This makes the group function like one single telescope. An example is shown in Figure 23.7. To learn more about radio telescopes and radio astronomy in general, go to 	radio telescopes look like satellite dishes	true
Telescopes on Earth all have one big problem: Incoming light must pass through the atmosphere. This blocks some wavelengths of radiation. Also, motion in the atmosphere distorts light. You see this when you see stars twinkling in the night sky. Many observatories are built on high mountains. There is less air above the telescope, so there is less interference from the atmosphere. Space telescopes avoid such problems completely since they orbit outside the atmosphere. The Hubble Space Telescope is the best known space telescope. Hubble is shown in Figure 23.8. Hubble began operations in 1994. Since then it has provided huge amounts of data. The telescope has helped astronomers answer many of the biggest questions in astronomy. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) has placed three other major space telescopes in orbit. Each uses a different part of the electromagnetic spectrum. The James Webb Space Telescope will launch in 2014. The telescope will replace the aging Hubble. To learn more about NASAs great observatories, check out 	the hubble telescope is the only space telescope ever placed in orbit	false
In 1610, Galileo looked at the night sky through the first telescope. This tool allowed him to make the following discoveries (among others): There are more stars in the night sky than the unaided eye can see. The band of light called the Milky Way consists of many stars. The Moon has craters (see Figure 23.10). Venus has phases like the Moon. Jupiter has moons orbiting around it. There are dark spots that move across the surface of the Sun. Galileos observations made people think differently about the universe. They made them think about the solar system and Earths place in it. Until that time, people believed that the Sun and planets revolved around Earth. One hundred years before Galileo, Copernicus had said that the Earth and the other planets revolved around the Sun. No one would believe him. But Galileos observations through his telescope proved that Copernicus was right. 	galileo observed that venus has phases like the moon	true
In 1610, Galileo looked at the night sky through the first telescope. This tool allowed him to make the following discoveries (among others): There are more stars in the night sky than the unaided eye can see. The band of light called the Milky Way consists of many stars. The Moon has craters (see Figure 23.10). Venus has phases like the Moon. Jupiter has moons orbiting around it. There are dark spots that move across the surface of the Sun. Galileos observations made people think differently about the universe. They made them think about the solar system and Earths place in it. Until that time, people believed that the Sun and planets revolved around Earth. One hundred years before Galileo, Copernicus had said that the Earth and the other planets revolved around the Sun. No one would believe him. But Galileos observations through his telescope proved that Copernicus was right. 	galileos observations supported the theory that planets revolve around the sun	true
We need a really big unit to measure distances out in space because distances between stars are so great. A light- year, 9.5 trillion kilometers (5.9 trillion miles), is the distance that light travels in one year. Thats a long way! Out in space, its actually a pretty short distance. Proxima Centauri is the closest star to us after the Sun. This near neighbor is 4.22 light-years away. That means the light from Proxima Centauri takes 4.22 years to reach us. Our galaxy, the Milky Way Galaxy, is about 100,000 light-years across. So it takes light 100,000 years to travel from one side of the galaxy to the other! It turns out that even 100,000 light years is a short distance. The most distant galaxies we have detected are more than 13 billion light-years away. Thats over a hundred-billion-trillion kilometers! 	a light year is a measure of time	false
Light is one type of electromagnetic radiation. Light is energy that travels in the form of an electromagnetic wave. Figure 23.2 shows a diagram of an electromagnetic wave. An electromagnetic (EM) wave has two parts: an electric field and a magnetic field. The electric and magnetic fields vibrate up and down, which makes the wave. The wavelength is the horizontal distance between two of the same points on the wave, like wave crest to wave crest. A waves frequency measures the number of wavelengths that pass a given point every second. As wavelength increases, frequency decreases. This means that as wavelengths get shorter, more waves move past a particular spot in the same amount of time. 	type of electromagnetic wave with the highest frequency	1.a
Visible light is the part of the electromagnetic spectrum (Figure 23.3) that humans can see. Visible light includes all the colors of the rainbow. Each color is determined by its wavelength. Visible light ranges from violet wavelengths of 400 nanometers (nm) through red at 700 nm. There are parts of the electromagnetic spectrum that humans cannot see. This radiation exists all around you. You just cant see it! Every star, including our Sun, emits radiation of many wavelengths. Astronomers can learn a lot from studying the details of the spectrum of radiation from a star. Many extremely interesting objects cant be seen with the unaided eye. Astronomers use telescopes to see objects at wavelengths all across the electromagnetic spectrum. Some very hot stars emit light primarily at ultraviolet wavelengths. There are extremely hot objects that emit X-rays and even gamma rays. Some very cool stars shine mostly in the infrared light wavelengths. Radio waves come from the faintest, most distant objects. To learn more about stars spectra, visit 	the most distant objects are viewed with radio waves	false
Light is one type of electromagnetic radiation. Light is energy that travels in the form of an electromagnetic wave. Figure 23.2 shows a diagram of an electromagnetic wave. An electromagnetic (EM) wave has two parts: an electric field and a magnetic field. The electric and magnetic fields vibrate up and down, which makes the wave. The wavelength is the horizontal distance between two of the same points on the wave, like wave crest to wave crest. A waves frequency measures the number of wavelengths that pass a given point every second. As wavelength increases, frequency decreases. This means that as wavelengths get shorter, more waves move past a particular spot in the same amount of time. 	number of waves that pass a given point per second	2.f
Light is one type of electromagnetic radiation. Light is energy that travels in the form of an electromagnetic wave. Figure 23.2 shows a diagram of an electromagnetic wave. An electromagnetic (EM) wave has two parts: an electric field and a magnetic field. The electric and magnetic fields vibrate up and down, which makes the wave. The wavelength is the horizontal distance between two of the same points on the wave, like wave crest to wave crest. A waves frequency measures the number of wavelengths that pass a given point every second. As wavelength increases, frequency decreases. This means that as wavelengths get shorter, more waves move past a particular spot in the same amount of time. 	type of electromagnetic wave with the longest wavelength	3.d
Radio telescopes collect radio waves. These telescopes are even larger telescopes than reflectors. Radio telescopes look a lot like satellite dishes. In fact, both are designed to collect and focus radio waves or microwaves from space. The largest single radio telescope in the world is at the Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico (see Figure 23.6). This telescope is located in a natural sinkhole. The sinkhole formed when water flowing underground dissolved the limestone. This telescope would collapse under its own weight if it were not supported by the ground. There is a big disadvantage to this design. The telescope can only observe the part of the sky that happens to be overhead at a given time. A group of radio telescopes can be linked together with a computer. The telescopes observe the same object. The computer then combines the data from each telescope. This makes the group function like one single telescope. An example is shown in Figure 23.7. To learn more about radio telescopes and radio astronomy in general, go to 	radio telescopes can be linked together to gather more data on a space object	true
Light is one type of electromagnetic radiation. Light is energy that travels in the form of an electromagnetic wave. Figure 23.2 shows a diagram of an electromagnetic wave. An electromagnetic (EM) wave has two parts: an electric field and a magnetic field. The electric and magnetic fields vibrate up and down, which makes the wave. The wavelength is the horizontal distance between two of the same points on the wave, like wave crest to wave crest. A waves frequency measures the number of wavelengths that pass a given point every second. As wavelength increases, frequency decreases. This means that as wavelengths get shorter, more waves move past a particular spot in the same amount of time. 	horizontal distance between the same points on adjacent waves	4.e
Light is one type of electromagnetic radiation. Light is energy that travels in the form of an electromagnetic wave. Figure 23.2 shows a diagram of an electromagnetic wave. An electromagnetic (EM) wave has two parts: an electric field and a magnetic field. The electric and magnetic fields vibrate up and down, which makes the wave. The wavelength is the horizontal distance between two of the same points on the wave, like wave crest to wave crest. A waves frequency measures the number of wavelengths that pass a given point every second. As wavelength increases, frequency decreases. This means that as wavelengths get shorter, more waves move past a particular spot in the same amount of time. 	the longer the wavelength the higher the frequency	true
Earth is just a tiny speck in the universe. Our planet is surrounded by lots of space. Light travels across empty space. Astronomers can study light from stars to learn about the universe. Light is the visible part of the electromagnetic spectrum. Astronomers use the light that comes to us to gather information about the universe. 	space telescopes are able to gather more types of waves than landbased telescopes	false
Radio telescopes collect radio waves. These telescopes are even larger telescopes than reflectors. Radio telescopes look a lot like satellite dishes. In fact, both are designed to collect and focus radio waves or microwaves from space. The largest single radio telescope in the world is at the Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico (see Figure 23.6). This telescope is located in a natural sinkhole. The sinkhole formed when water flowing underground dissolved the limestone. This telescope would collapse under its own weight if it were not supported by the ground. There is a big disadvantage to this design. The telescope can only observe the part of the sky that happens to be overhead at a given time. A group of radio telescopes can be linked together with a computer. The telescopes observe the same object. The computer then combines the data from each telescope. This makes the group function like one single telescope. An example is shown in Figure 23.7. To learn more about radio telescopes and radio astronomy in general, go to 	device that collects and focuses radio waves from space	5.g
Earth is just a tiny speck in the universe. Our planet is surrounded by lots of space. Light travels across empty space. Astronomers can study light from stars to learn about the universe. Light is the visible part of the electromagnetic spectrum. Astronomers use the light that comes to us to gather information about the universe. 	device that gathers and magnifies visible light from space	6. c
We need a really big unit to measure distances out in space because distances between stars are so great. A light- year, 9.5 trillion kilometers (5.9 trillion miles), is the distance that light travels in one year. Thats a long way! Out in space, its actually a pretty short distance. Proxima Centauri is the closest star to us after the Sun. This near neighbor is 4.22 light-years away. That means the light from Proxima Centauri takes 4.22 years to reach us. Our galaxy, the Milky Way Galaxy, is about 100,000 light-years across. So it takes light 100,000 years to travel from one side of the galaxy to the other! It turns out that even 100,000 light years is a short distance. The most distant galaxies we have detected are more than 13 billion light-years away. Thats over a hundred-billion-trillion kilometers! 	unit for measuring the vast distances of space	7. b
Humans did not reach space until the second half of the 20th century. They needed somehow to break past Earths gravity. A rocket moves rapidly in one direction. The device is propelled by particles flying out of it at high speed in the other direction. There are records of the Chinese using rockets in war against the Mongols as early as the 13th century. The Mongols then used rockets to attack Eastern Europe. Early rockets were also used to launch fireworks. 	humans first reached space at the beginning of the 20th century	false
One of the first uses of rockets in space was to launch satellites. A satellite is an object that orbits a larger object. An orbit is a circular or elliptical path around an object. Natural objects in orbit are called natural satellites. The Moon is a natural satellite. Human-made objects in orbit are called artificial satellites. There are more and more artificial satellites orbiting Earth all the time. They all get into space using some sort of rocket. 	rockets were developed before scientists knew how they worked	true
One of the first uses of rockets in space was to launch satellites. A satellite is an object that orbits a larger object. An orbit is a circular or elliptical path around an object. Natural objects in orbit are called natural satellites. The Moon is a natural satellite. Human-made objects in orbit are called artificial satellites. There are more and more artificial satellites orbiting Earth all the time. They all get into space using some sort of rocket. 	the invention of gunpowder allowed rockets to travel to space	false
One of the first uses of rockets in space was to launch satellites. A satellite is an object that orbits a larger object. An orbit is a circular or elliptical path around an object. Natural objects in orbit are called natural satellites. The Moon is a natural satellite. Human-made objects in orbit are called artificial satellites. There are more and more artificial satellites orbiting Earth all the time. They all get into space using some sort of rocket. 	only two nations have put a human on the moon the us and china	false
One of the first uses of rockets in space was to launch satellites. A satellite is an object that orbits a larger object. An orbit is a circular or elliptical path around an object. Natural objects in orbit are called natural satellites. The Moon is a natural satellite. Human-made objects in orbit are called artificial satellites. There are more and more artificial satellites orbiting Earth all the time. They all get into space using some sort of rocket. 	the first use of rockets in space was to land astronauts on the moon	false
One of the first uses of rockets in space was to launch satellites. A satellite is an object that orbits a larger object. An orbit is a circular or elliptical path around an object. Natural objects in orbit are called natural satellites. The Moon is a natural satellite. Human-made objects in orbit are called artificial satellites. There are more and more artificial satellites orbiting Earth all the time. They all get into space using some sort of rocket. 	a satellite is an object that orbits a smaller object	true
One of the first uses of rockets in space was to launch satellites. A satellite is an object that orbits a larger object. An orbit is a circular or elliptical path around an object. Natural objects in orbit are called natural satellites. The Moon is a natural satellite. Human-made objects in orbit are called artificial satellites. There are more and more artificial satellites orbiting Earth all the time. They all get into space using some sort of rocket. 	most satellites launch themselves into orbit	false
Satellites have different views depending on their orbit. Satellites may be put in a low orbit. These satellites orbit from north to south over the poles. These satellites view a different part of Earth each time they circle. Imaging and weather satellites need this type of view. Satellite may be placed so that they orbit at the same rate the Earth spins. The satellite then remains over the same location on the surface. Communications satellites are often placed in these orbits. 	thousands of satellites are in orbit around earth	true
One of the first uses of rockets in space was to launch satellites. A satellite is an object that orbits a larger object. An orbit is a circular or elliptical path around an object. Natural objects in orbit are called natural satellites. The Moon is a natural satellite. Human-made objects in orbit are called artificial satellites. There are more and more artificial satellites orbiting Earth all the time. They all get into space using some sort of rocket. 	it was only 12 years between when the first artificial satellite was launched and neil armstrong walked	true
Dozens of satellites collect data about the Earth. One example is NASAs Landsat satellites. These satellites make detailed images of Earths continents and coastal areas. Other satellites study the oceans, atmosphere, polar ice sheets, and other Earth systems. This data helps us to monitor climate change. Other long-term changes in the planet are also best seen from space. Satellite images help scientists understand how Earths systems affect one another. Different satellites monitor different wavelengths of energy, as in Figure 23.19. 	landsat satellites make detailed images of continents and coasts	true
One of the first uses of rockets in space was to launch satellites. A satellite is an object that orbits a larger object. An orbit is a circular or elliptical path around an object. Natural objects in orbit are called natural satellites. The Moon is a natural satellite. Human-made objects in orbit are called artificial satellites. There are more and more artificial satellites orbiting Earth all the time. They all get into space using some sort of rocket. 	an object can go into orbit because of the law of conservation of momentum	false
Rockets were used for centuries before anyone could explain how they worked. The theory came about in 1687. Isaac Newton (16431727) described three basic laws of motion, now referred to as Newtons Laws of Motion: 1. An object in motion will remain in motion unless acted upon by a force. 2. Force equals mass multiplied by acceleration. 3. To every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction. Which of these three best explains how a rocket works? Newtons third law of motion. When a rockets propulsion pushes in one direction, the rocket moves in the opposite direction, as seen in the Figure 23.12. For a long time, many people believed that a rocket wouldnt work in space. There would be nothing for the rocket to push against. But they do work! Fuel is ignited in a chamber. The gases in the chamber explode. The explosion creates pressure that forces the gases out of one side of the rocket. The rocket moves in the opposite direction, as shown in Figure 23.13. The force pushing the rocket is called thrust. 	newtons third law of motion helps explain how a rocket will travel in space	true
Satellites have different views depending on their orbit. Satellites may be put in a low orbit. These satellites orbit from north to south over the poles. These satellites view a different part of Earth each time they circle. Imaging and weather satellites need this type of view. Satellite may be placed so that they orbit at the same rate the Earth spins. The satellite then remains over the same location on the surface. Communications satellites are often placed in these orbits. 	imaging satellites are placed in high orbits over earth	false
In response to Sputnik program, the U.S. launched two satellites. Explorer I was launched on January 31, 1958 and Vanguard 1 on March 17, 1958. National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) was established that same year. The race was on! On April 12, 1961, a Soviet cosmonaut became the first human in space and in orbit. Less than one month later May 5, 1961 the U.S. sent its first astronaut into space: Alan Shepherd. The first American in orbit was John Glenn, in February 1962. And on it went. 	alan shepherd was the first astronaut to walk on the moon	false
Both the United States and the Soviet Union sent space probes to other planets. A space probe is an unmanned spacecraft. The craft collects data by flying near or landing on an object in space. This could be a planet, moon, asteroid, or comet. The USSR sent several probes to Venus in the Venera missions. Some landed on the surface and sent back data. The U.S. sent probes to Mercury, Venus, and Mars in the Mariner missions. Two probes landed on Mars during the Viking missions. The U.S. also sent probes to the outer solar system. These probes conducted fly-bys of Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. The Pioneer and Voyager probes are now out beyond the edges of our solar system. We have lost contact with the two Pioneer probes. We hope to maintain contact with the two Voyager probes until at least 2020. 	the us has landed space probes on mars	true
One of the first uses of rockets in space was to launch satellites. A satellite is an object that orbits a larger object. An orbit is a circular or elliptical path around an object. Natural objects in orbit are called natural satellites. The Moon is a natural satellite. Human-made objects in orbit are called artificial satellites. There are more and more artificial satellites orbiting Earth all the time. They all get into space using some sort of rocket. 	circular or elliptical path around an object	1.f
Rockets were used for centuries before anyone could explain how they worked. The theory came about in 1687. Isaac Newton (16431727) described three basic laws of motion, now referred to as Newtons Laws of Motion: 1. An object in motion will remain in motion unless acted upon by a force. 2. Force equals mass multiplied by acceleration. 3. To every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction. Which of these three best explains how a rocket works? Newtons third law of motion. When a rockets propulsion pushes in one direction, the rocket moves in the opposite direction, as seen in the Figure 23.12. For a long time, many people believed that a rocket wouldnt work in space. There would be nothing for the rocket to push against. But they do work! Fuel is ignited in a chamber. The gases in the chamber explode. The explosion creates pressure that forces the gases out of one side of the rocket. The rocket moves in the opposite direction, as shown in Figure 23.13. The force pushing the rocket is called thrust. 	force that pushes a rocket	2.b
One of the first uses of rockets in space was to launch satellites. A satellite is an object that orbits a larger object. An orbit is a circular or elliptical path around an object. Natural objects in orbit are called natural satellites. The Moon is a natural satellite. Human-made objects in orbit are called artificial satellites. There are more and more artificial satellites orbiting Earth all the time. They all get into space using some sort of rocket. 	object that orbits a larger object	3.d
One of the first uses of rockets in space was to launch satellites. A satellite is an object that orbits a larger object. An orbit is a circular or elliptical path around an object. Natural objects in orbit are called natural satellites. The Moon is a natural satellite. Human-made objects in orbit are called artificial satellites. There are more and more artificial satellites orbiting Earth all the time. They all get into space using some sort of rocket. 	largest artificial satellite	4.e
One of the first uses of rockets in space was to launch satellites. A satellite is an object that orbits a larger object. An orbit is a circular or elliptical path around an object. Natural objects in orbit are called natural satellites. The Moon is a natural satellite. Human-made objects in orbit are called artificial satellites. There are more and more artificial satellites orbiting Earth all the time. They all get into space using some sort of rocket. 	us agency in charge of space exploration	5.g
Humans did not reach space until the second half of the 20th century. They needed somehow to break past Earths gravity. A rocket moves rapidly in one direction. The device is propelled by particles flying out of it at high speed in the other direction. There are records of the Chinese using rockets in war against the Mongols as early as the 13th century. The Mongols then used rockets to attack Eastern Europe. Early rockets were also used to launch fireworks. 	vehicle pushed in one direction by particles flying out of it in the opposite direction	6.a
Both the United States and the Soviet Union sent space probes to other planets. A space probe is an unmanned spacecraft. The craft collects data by flying near or landing on an object in space. This could be a planet, moon, asteroid, or comet. The USSR sent several probes to Venus in the Venera missions. Some landed on the surface and sent back data. The U.S. sent probes to Mercury, Venus, and Mars in the Mariner missions. Two probes landed on Mars during the Viking missions. The U.S. also sent probes to the outer solar system. These probes conducted fly-bys of Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. The Pioneer and Voyager probes are now out beyond the edges of our solar system. We have lost contact with the two Pioneer probes. We hope to maintain contact with the two Voyager probes until at least 2020. 	spacecraft that explores space without people aboard	7.c
While the United States continued missions to the Moon in the early 1970s, the Soviets worked to build a space station. A space station is a large spacecraft. People can live on this craft for a long period of time. 	space station that is a joint project of many nations	1.b
While the United States continued missions to the Moon in the early 1970s, the Soviets worked to build a space station. A space station is a large spacecraft. People can live on this craft for a long period of time. 	any large satellite that people can live on	2.c
Incredible images have come from the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). Even more incredible scientific discoveries have come from HST. The Hubble was the first telescope in space. It was put into orbit by the space shuttle Discovery in 1990. Since then, four shuttle missions have gone to the Hubble to make repairs and upgrades. The last repair mission to the Hubble happened in 2009. An example of a HST image is in Figure 23.28, 	part of a space shuttle that has wings	3.g
While the United States continued missions to the Moon in the early 1970s, the Soviets worked to build a space station. A space station is a large spacecraft. People can live on this craft for a long period of time. 	one purpose of the international space station is to conduct medical research	true
While the United States continued missions to the Moon in the early 1970s, the Soviets worked to build a space station. A space station is a large spacecraft. People can live on this craft for a long period of time. 	space station with the longest continuous use	4.f
Budget concerns have impacted NASA in recent years. Many scientists have come together to discuss the goals of the U.S. space program. Some would like to further explore the Moon. Others are interested in landing on Mars. A variety of destinations in the inner solar system may also be visited. Private aerospace companies will play more of a role in the coming years. 	private companies are increasingly getting into space exploration	true
While the United States continued missions to the Moon in the early 1970s, the Soviets worked to build a space station. A space station is a large spacecraft. People can live on this craft for a long period of time. 	reusable space vehicle for carrying equipment and people to and from space	5.a
While the United States continued missions to the Moon in the early 1970s, the Soviets worked to build a space station. A space station is a large spacecraft. People can live on this craft for a long period of time. 	first us space station	6.d
We continue to explore the solar system. A rover is like a spacecraft on wheels (Figure 23.29). It can wheel around on the surface. Scientists on Earth tell it where to go. The craft then collects and sends back data from that locations. The Mars Pathfinder studied the red planet for nearly three months in 1997. Two more rovers, Spirit and Opportunity, landed on Mars in 2004. Both were only designed to last 90 days, but have lasted many times longer. Spirit sent back data until it became stuck in January 2010. Opportunity continues to explore Mars. Several spacecraft are currently in orbit, studying the Martian surface and thin atmosphere. 	there are currently rovers on venus and mars	false
Incredible images have come from the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). Even more incredible scientific discoveries have come from HST. The Hubble was the first telescope in space. It was put into orbit by the space shuttle Discovery in 1990. Since then, four shuttle missions have gone to the Hubble to make repairs and upgrades. The last repair mission to the Hubble happened in 2009. An example of a HST image is in Figure 23.28, 	first space telescope	7.e
Budget concerns have impacted NASA in recent years. Many scientists have come together to discuss the goals of the U.S. space program. Some would like to further explore the Moon. Others are interested in landing on Mars. A variety of destinations in the inner solar system may also be visited. Private aerospace companies will play more of a role in the coming years. 	the mission of nasa is to study everything in the solar system except earth	false
While the United States continued missions to the Moon in the early 1970s, the Soviets worked to build a space station. A space station is a large spacecraft. People can live on this craft for a long period of time. 	the record for one crew inhabiting a space station is ten years	false
Incredible images have come from the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). Even more incredible scientific discoveries have come from HST. The Hubble was the first telescope in space. It was put into orbit by the space shuttle Discovery in 1990. Since then, four shuttle missions have gone to the Hubble to make repairs and upgrades. The last repair mission to the Hubble happened in 2009. An example of a HST image is in Figure 23.28, 	the huygens space mission is studying pluto	false
While the United States continued missions to the Moon in the early 1970s, the Soviets worked to build a space station. A space station is a large spacecraft. People can live on this craft for a long period of time. 	the soviet salyut space stations were all temporary stations	true
While the United States continued missions to the Moon in the early 1970s, the Soviets worked to build a space station. A space station is a large spacecraft. People can live on this craft for a long period of time. 	skylab studied the effects of staying in space for long periods of time	true
Incredible images have come from the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). Even more incredible scientific discoveries have come from HST. The Hubble was the first telescope in space. It was put into orbit by the space shuttle Discovery in 1990. Since then, four shuttle missions have gone to the Hubble to make repairs and upgrades. The last repair mission to the Hubble happened in 2009. An example of a HST image is in Figure 23.28, 	a space shuttle includes an orbiter fuel tank and booster rockets	true
While the United States continued missions to the Moon in the early 1970s, the Soviets worked to build a space station. A space station is a large spacecraft. People can live on this craft for a long period of time. 	the space shuttle program flew a total of 10 missions	false
Incredible images have come from the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). Even more incredible scientific discoveries have come from HST. The Hubble was the first telescope in space. It was put into orbit by the space shuttle Discovery in 1990. Since then, four shuttle missions have gone to the Hubble to make repairs and upgrades. The last repair mission to the Hubble happened in 2009. An example of a HST image is in Figure 23.28, 	the last space shuttle was retired in 2001	false
The disasters have caused NASA to focus on developing unmanned missions. Missions without a crew are less expensive and less dangerous. These missions still provide a great deal of valuable information. 	space shuttle disasters caused nasa to focus on missions without crews	true
While the United States continued missions to the Moon in the early 1970s, the Soviets worked to build a space station. A space station is a large spacecraft. People can live on this craft for a long period of time. 	saturns moon titan has some of the conditions needed to support life	true
We continue to explore the solar system. A rover is like a spacecraft on wheels (Figure 23.29). It can wheel around on the surface. Scientists on Earth tell it where to go. The craft then collects and sends back data from that locations. The Mars Pathfinder studied the red planet for nearly three months in 1997. Two more rovers, Spirit and Opportunity, landed on Mars in 2004. Both were only designed to last 90 days, but have lasted many times longer. Spirit sent back data until it became stuck in January 2010. Opportunity continues to explore Mars. Several spacecraft are currently in orbit, studying the Martian surface and thin atmosphere. 	the stardust mission collected dust particles from the surface of mars	false
Budget concerns have impacted NASA in recent years. Many scientists have come together to discuss the goals of the U.S. space program. Some would like to further explore the Moon. Others are interested in landing on Mars. A variety of destinations in the inner solar system may also be visited. Private aerospace companies will play more of a role in the coming years. 	private companies will play more of role in future space missions	true
How long does it take Earth to spin once on its axis? One rotation is 24 hours. That rotation is the length of a day! Whatever time it is, the side of Earth facing the Sun has daylight. The side facing away from the Sun is dark. If you look at Earth from the North Pole, the planet spins counterclockwise. As the Earth rotates, you see the Sun moving across the sky from east to west. We often say that the Sun is rising or setting. The Sun rises in the east and sets in the west. Actually, it is the Earths rotation that makes it appear that way. The Moon and the stars at night also seem to rise in the east and set in the west. Earths rotation is also responsible for this too. As Earth turns, the Moon and stars change position in the sky. 	earth is the only planet in the solar system known to have liquid water	true
Earth and Moon orbit each other. This Earth-Moon system orbits the Sun in a regular path (Figure 24.4). Gravity is the force of attraction between all objects. Gravity keeps the Earth and Moon in their orbits. Earths gravity pulls the Moon toward Earths center. Without gravity, the Moon would continue moving in a straight line off into space. All objects in the universe have a gravitational attraction to each other (Figure 24.5). The strength of the force of gravity depends on two things. They are the mass of the objects and the distance between them. The greater the objects mass, the greater the force of attraction. As the distance between the objects increases, the force of attraction decreases. 	all objects in the solar system have gravitational attraction to each other	true
How long does it take Earth to spin once on its axis? One rotation is 24 hours. That rotation is the length of a day! Whatever time it is, the side of Earth facing the Sun has daylight. The side facing away from the Sun is dark. If you look at Earth from the North Pole, the planet spins counterclockwise. As the Earth rotates, you see the Sun moving across the sky from east to west. We often say that the Sun is rising or setting. The Sun rises in the east and sets in the west. Actually, it is the Earths rotation that makes it appear that way. The Moon and the stars at night also seem to rise in the east and set in the west. Earths rotation is also responsible for this too. As Earth turns, the Moon and stars change position in the sky. 	if you look at earth from the north pole the planet spins in a clockwise direction	false
Earths axis is an imaginary line passing through the North and South Poles. Earthsrotation is its spins on its axis. Rotation is what a top does around its spindle. As Earth spins on its axis, it also orbits around the Sun. This is called Earths revolution. These motions lead to the cycles we see. Day and night, seasons, and the tides are caused by Earths motions. 	earth is divided into four hemispheres	false
How long does it take Earth to spin once on its axis? One rotation is 24 hours. That rotation is the length of a day! Whatever time it is, the side of Earth facing the Sun has daylight. The side facing away from the Sun is dark. If you look at Earth from the North Pole, the planet spins counterclockwise. As the Earth rotates, you see the Sun moving across the sky from east to west. We often say that the Sun is rising or setting. The Sun rises in the east and sets in the west. Actually, it is the Earths rotation that makes it appear that way. The Moon and the stars at night also seem to rise in the east and set in the west. Earths rotation is also responsible for this too. As Earth turns, the Moon and stars change position in the sky. 	the moon appears to rise in the east because earth rotates from east to west	false
Earths revolution around the Sun takes 365.24 days. That is equal to one year. The Earth stays in orbit around the Sun because of the Suns gravity (Figure 24.12). Earths orbit is not a circle. It is somewhat elliptical. So as we travel around the Sun, sometimes we are a little farther away from the Sun. Sometimes we are closer to the Sun. Students sometimes think the slightly oval shape of our orbit causes Earths seasons. Thats not true! The seasons are due to the tilt of Earths axis, as discussed above. 	leap year is needed because earth takes more than 365 days to orbit the sun	true
Earths axis is an imaginary line passing through the North and South Poles. Earthsrotation is its spins on its axis. Rotation is what a top does around its spindle. As Earth spins on its axis, it also orbits around the Sun. This is called Earths revolution. These motions lead to the cycles we see. Day and night, seasons, and the tides are caused by Earths motions. 	earth tilts about 3 degrees on its axis	false
The Earth is tilted 23 1/2 on its axis (Figure 24.10). This means that as the Earth rotates, one hemisphere has longer days with shorter nights. At the same time the other hemisphere has shorter days and longer nights. For example, in the Northern hemisphere summer begins on June 21. On this date, the North Pole is pointed directly toward the Sun. This is the longest day and shortest night of the year in the Northern Hemisphere. The South Pole is pointed away from the Sun. This means that the Southern Hemisphere experiences its longest night and shortest day (Figure 24.11). The hemisphere that is tilted away from the Sun is cooler because it receives less direct rays. As Earth orbits the Sun, the Northern Hemisphere goes from winter to spring, then summer and fall. The Southern Hemisphere does the opposite from summer to fall to winter to spring. When it is winter in the Northern hemisphere, it is summer in the Southern hemisphere, and vice versa. 	winter begins in the southern hemisphere on june 21	true
Earth and Moon orbit each other. This Earth-Moon system orbits the Sun in a regular path (Figure 24.4). Gravity is the force of attraction between all objects. Gravity keeps the Earth and Moon in their orbits. Earths gravity pulls the Moon toward Earths center. Without gravity, the Moon would continue moving in a straight line off into space. All objects in the universe have a gravitational attraction to each other (Figure 24.5). The strength of the force of gravity depends on two things. They are the mass of the objects and the distance between them. The greater the objects mass, the greater the force of attraction. As the distance between the objects increases, the force of attraction decreases. 	earth gets more gravitational pull from the sun than the moon because it is larger	false
The Earth is tilted 23 1/2 on its axis (Figure 24.10). This means that as the Earth rotates, one hemisphere has longer days with shorter nights. At the same time the other hemisphere has shorter days and longer nights. For example, in the Northern hemisphere summer begins on June 21. On this date, the North Pole is pointed directly toward the Sun. This is the longest day and shortest night of the year in the Northern Hemisphere. The South Pole is pointed away from the Sun. This means that the Southern Hemisphere experiences its longest night and shortest day (Figure 24.11). The hemisphere that is tilted away from the Sun is cooler because it receives less direct rays. As Earth orbits the Sun, the Northern Hemisphere goes from winter to spring, then summer and fall. The Southern Hemisphere does the opposite from summer to fall to winter to spring. When it is winter in the Northern hemisphere, it is summer in the Southern hemisphere, and vice versa. 	the longest day in the northern hemisphere occurs on june 21	true
Earths axis is an imaginary line passing through the North and South Poles. Earthsrotation is its spins on its axis. Rotation is what a top does around its spindle. As Earth spins on its axis, it also orbits around the Sun. This is called Earths revolution. These motions lead to the cycles we see. Day and night, seasons, and the tides are caused by Earths motions. 	the planets move in fixed paths around the sun	true
Earth has a magnetic field (Figure 24.6). The magnetic field has north and south poles. The field extends several thousand kilometers into space. Earths magnetic field is created by the movements of molten metal in the outer core. Earths magnetic field shields us from harmful radiation from the Sun (Figure 24.7). If you have a large bar magnet, you can hang it from a string. Then watch as it aligns itself in a north-south direction, in response to Earths magnetic field. A compass needle also aligns with Earths magnetic field. People can navigate by finding magnetic north (Figure 24.8). 	the earths mostly iron crust produces the magnetic field	false
Earths axis is an imaginary line passing through the North and South Poles. Earthsrotation is its spins on its axis. Rotation is what a top does around its spindle. As Earth spins on its axis, it also orbits around the Sun. This is called Earths revolution. These motions lead to the cycles we see. Day and night, seasons, and the tides are caused by Earths motions. 	to make one complete rotation takes earth 36524 days	false
Earths axis is an imaginary line passing through the North and South Poles. Earthsrotation is its spins on its axis. Rotation is what a top does around its spindle. As Earth spins on its axis, it also orbits around the Sun. This is called Earths revolution. These motions lead to the cycles we see. Day and night, seasons, and the tides are caused by Earths motions. 	planets closer to the sun that earth have shorter years	true
The Earth is tilted 23 1/2 on its axis (Figure 24.10). This means that as the Earth rotates, one hemisphere has longer days with shorter nights. At the same time the other hemisphere has shorter days and longer nights. For example, in the Northern hemisphere summer begins on June 21. On this date, the North Pole is pointed directly toward the Sun. This is the longest day and shortest night of the year in the Northern Hemisphere. The South Pole is pointed away from the Sun. This means that the Southern Hemisphere experiences its longest night and shortest day (Figure 24.11). The hemisphere that is tilted away from the Sun is cooler because it receives less direct rays. As Earth orbits the Sun, the Northern Hemisphere goes from winter to spring, then summer and fall. The Southern Hemisphere does the opposite from summer to fall to winter to spring. When it is winter in the Northern hemisphere, it is summer in the Southern hemisphere, and vice versa. 	the hemisphere that receives less direct rays of sunlight is cooler	true
Earths axis is an imaginary line passing through the North and South Poles. Earthsrotation is its spins on its axis. Rotation is what a top does around its spindle. As Earth spins on its axis, it also orbits around the Sun. This is called Earths revolution. These motions lead to the cycles we see. Day and night, seasons, and the tides are caused by Earths motions. 	all of the water on earth	1. d
As you walk, the ground usually looks pretty flat, even though the Earth is round. How do we know this? We have pictures of Earth taken from space that show that Earth is round. Astronauts aboard the Apollo 17 shuttle took this one, called The Blue Marble (Figure 24.1). Earth looks like a giant blue and white ball. Long before spacecraft took photos of Earth from space, people knew that Earth was round. How? One way was to look at ships sailing off into the distance. What do you see when you watch a tall ship sail over the horizon of the Earth? The bottom part of the ship disappears faster than the top part. What would that ship look like if Earth was flat? No part of it would disappear before the other. It would all just get smaller as it moved further away. In the solar system, the planets orbit around the Sun. The Sun and each of the planets of our solar system are round. Earth is the third planet from the Sun. It is one of the inner planets. Jupiter is an outer planet. It is the largest planet in the solar system at about 1,000 times the size of Earth. The Sun is about 1,000 times bigger than Jupiter! (Figure The outer planets in the solar system are giant balls of swirling gas. Earth and the other inner planets are relatively small, dense, and rocky. Most of Earths surface is covered with water. As far as we know, Earth is also the only planet that has liquid water. Earths atmosphere has oxygen. The water and oxygen are crucial to life as we know it. Earth appears to be the only planet in the solar system with living creatures. You can learn more about the planets in the Our Solar System chapter. Some of the different parts of the Earth are our: Since Earth is round, the layers all have the word sphere at the end (Figure 24.3). All of Earths layers interact. Therefore, Earths surface is constantly undergoing change. 	half of a sphere	2. c
Earths axis is an imaginary line passing through the North and South Poles. Earthsrotation is its spins on its axis. Rotation is what a top does around its spindle. As Earth spins on its axis, it also orbits around the Sun. This is called Earths revolution. These motions lead to the cycles we see. Day and night, seasons, and the tides are caused by Earths motions. 	spinning motion around an axis	3.g
Earths axis is an imaginary line passing through the North and South Poles. Earthsrotation is its spins on its axis. Rotation is what a top does around its spindle. As Earth spins on its axis, it also orbits around the Sun. This is called Earths revolution. These motions lead to the cycles we see. Day and night, seasons, and the tides are caused by Earths motions. 	all of the living organisms on earth	4.b
Earths axis is an imaginary line passing through the North and South Poles. Earthsrotation is its spins on its axis. Rotation is what a top does around its spindle. As Earth spins on its axis, it also orbits around the Sun. This is called Earths revolution. These motions lead to the cycles we see. Day and night, seasons, and the tides are caused by Earths motions. 	imaginary line passing through the poles of a planet	5.a
Earths axis is an imaginary line passing through the North and South Poles. Earthsrotation is its spins on its axis. Rotation is what a top does around its spindle. As Earth spins on its axis, it also orbits around the Sun. This is called Earths revolution. These motions lead to the cycles we see. Day and night, seasons, and the tides are caused by Earths motions. 	all of the solid rock of earth	6.e
Earths revolution around the Sun takes 365.24 days. That is equal to one year. The Earth stays in orbit around the Sun because of the Suns gravity (Figure 24.12). Earths orbit is not a circle. It is somewhat elliptical. So as we travel around the Sun, sometimes we are a little farther away from the Sun. Sometimes we are closer to the Sun. Students sometimes think the slightly oval shape of our orbit causes Earths seasons. Thats not true! The seasons are due to the tilt of Earths axis, as discussed above. 	movement in an orbit around a larger body	7.f
The Moon is Earths only natural satellite. The Moon is about one-fourth the size of Earth, 3,476 kilometers in diameter. Gravity on the Moon is only one-sixth as strong as it is on Earth. If you weigh 120 pounds on Earth, you would only weigh 20 pounds on the Moon. You can jump six times as high on the Moon as you can on Earth. The Moon makes no light of its own. Like every other body in the solar system, it only reflects light from the Sun. The Moon rotates on its axis once for every orbit it makes around the Earth. What does this mean? This means that the same side of the Moon always faces Earth. The side of the Moon that always faces Earth is called the near side. The side of the Moon that always faces away from Earth is called the far side (Figure 24.13). All people for all time have only seen the Moons near side. The far side has only been seen by spacecraft. The Moon has no atmosphere. With no atmosphere, the Moon is not protected from extreme temperatures. The average surface temperature during the day is approximately 107C (225F). Daytime temperatures can reach as high as 123C (253F). At night, the average temperature drops to -153C (-243F). The lowest temperatures measured are as low as -233C (-397F). 	a total of six spaceships have landed on the moon	true
We all know what the Moon looks like. Its always looked the same during our lifetime. In fact, the Moon has looked the same to every person who has looked up at it for all time. Even the dinosaurs and trilobites, should they have looked up at it, would have seen the same thing. This is not true of Earth. Natural processes continually alter the Earths surface. Without these processes, would Earths surface resemble the Moons? Even though we cant see it from Earth, the Moon has changed recently too. Astronauts footprints are now on the Moon. They will remain unchanged for thousands of years, because there is no wind, rain, or living thing to disturb them. Only a falling meteorite could destroy them. 	there are no current plans for returning to the moon	true
The Moon is Earths only natural satellite. The Moon is about one-fourth the size of Earth, 3,476 kilometers in diameter. Gravity on the Moon is only one-sixth as strong as it is on Earth. If you weigh 120 pounds on Earth, you would only weigh 20 pounds on the Moon. You can jump six times as high on the Moon as you can on Earth. The Moon makes no light of its own. Like every other body in the solar system, it only reflects light from the Sun. The Moon rotates on its axis once for every orbit it makes around the Earth. What does this mean? This means that the same side of the Moon always faces Earth. The side of the Moon that always faces Earth is called the near side. The side of the Moon that always faces away from Earth is called the far side (Figure 24.13). All people for all time have only seen the Moons near side. The far side has only been seen by spacecraft. The Moon has no atmosphere. With no atmosphere, the Moon is not protected from extreme temperatures. The average surface temperature during the day is approximately 107C (225F). Daytime temperatures can reach as high as 123C (253F). At night, the average temperature drops to -153C (-243F). The lowest temperatures measured are as low as -233C (-397F). 	the moons gravity is about half as strong as earths gravity	false
There are no lakes, rivers, or even small puddles anywhere to be found on the Moons surface. So there is no running water and no atmosphere. This means that there is no erosion. Natural processes continually alter the Earths surface. Without these processes, our planets surface would be covered with meteorite craters just like the Moon. Many moons in our solar system have cratered surfaces. NASA scientists have discovered a large number of water molecules mixed in with lunar dirt. There is also surface water ice. Even though there is a very small amount of water, there is no atmosphere. Temperatures are extreme. So it comes as no surprise that there has not been evidence of life on the Moon. 	it takes the moon the same amount of time to make one rotation as it does to make one revolution	true
Like Earth, the Moon has a distinct crust, mantle, and core. The crust is composed of igneous rock. This rock is rich in the elements oxygen, silicon, magnesium, and aluminum. On the near side, the Moons crust is about 60 kilometers thick. On the far side, the crust is about 100 kilometers thick. The mantle is made of rock like Earths mantle. The Moon has a small metallic core, perhaps 600 to 800 kilometers in diameter. The composition of the core is probably mostly iron with some sulfur and nickel. We learned this both from the rock samples gathered by astronauts and from spacecraft sent to the Moon. 	the far side of the moon has been seen only from spacecraft	true
The landscape of the Moon - its surface features - is very different from Earth. The lunar landscape is covered by craters caused by asteroid impacts (Figure 24.14). The craters are bowl-shaped basins on the Moons surface. Because the Moon has no water, wind, or weather, the craters remain unchanged. The Moons coldest temperatures are found deep in the craters. The coldest craters are at the south pole on the Moons far side, where the Sun never shines. These temperatures are amongst the coldest in our entire solar system. 	most lunar maria are on the far side of the moon	false
We all know what the Moon looks like. Its always looked the same during our lifetime. In fact, the Moon has looked the same to every person who has looked up at it for all time. Even the dinosaurs and trilobites, should they have looked up at it, would have seen the same thing. This is not true of Earth. Natural processes continually alter the Earths surface. Without these processes, would Earths surface resemble the Moons? Even though we cant see it from Earth, the Moon has changed recently too. Astronauts footprints are now on the Moon. They will remain unchanged for thousands of years, because there is no wind, rain, or living thing to disturb them. Only a falling meteorite could destroy them. 	natural processes continually alter the moons surface	false
The landscape of the Moon - its surface features - is very different from Earth. The lunar landscape is covered by craters caused by asteroid impacts (Figure 24.14). The craters are bowl-shaped basins on the Moons surface. Because the Moon has no water, wind, or weather, the craters remain unchanged. The Moons coldest temperatures are found deep in the craters. The coldest craters are at the south pole on the Moons far side, where the Sun never shines. These temperatures are amongst the coldest in our entire solar system. 	lunar highlands are made of lightcolored rocks	true
There are no lakes, rivers, or even small puddles anywhere to be found on the Moons surface. So there is no running water and no atmosphere. This means that there is no erosion. Natural processes continually alter the Earths surface. Without these processes, our planets surface would be covered with meteorite craters just like the Moon. Many moons in our solar system have cratered surfaces. NASA scientists have discovered a large number of water molecules mixed in with lunar dirt. There is also surface water ice. Even though there is a very small amount of water, there is no atmosphere. Temperatures are extreme. So it comes as no surprise that there has not been evidence of life on the Moon. 	there are rivers but no lakes on the moon	false
We all know what the Moon looks like. Its always looked the same during our lifetime. In fact, the Moon has looked the same to every person who has looked up at it for all time. Even the dinosaurs and trilobites, should they have looked up at it, would have seen the same thing. This is not true of Earth. Natural processes continually alter the Earths surface. Without these processes, would Earths surface resemble the Moons? Even though we cant see it from Earth, the Moon has changed recently too. Astronauts footprints are now on the Moon. They will remain unchanged for thousands of years, because there is no wind, rain, or living thing to disturb them. Only a falling meteorite could destroy them. 	astronauts brought moon rocks back to earth	true
We all know what the Moon looks like. Its always looked the same during our lifetime. In fact, the Moon has looked the same to every person who has looked up at it for all time. Even the dinosaurs and trilobites, should they have looked up at it, would have seen the same thing. This is not true of Earth. Natural processes continually alter the Earths surface. Without these processes, would Earths surface resemble the Moons? Even though we cant see it from Earth, the Moon has changed recently too. Astronauts footprints are now on the Moon. They will remain unchanged for thousands of years, because there is no wind, rain, or living thing to disturb them. Only a falling meteorite could destroy them. 	the moon is earths only natural satellite	true
When you look at the Moon from Earth, you notice dark and light areas. The maria are dark, solid, flat areas of lava. Maria covers around 16% of the Moons surface, mostly on the near side. The maria formed about 3.0 to 3.5 billion years ago, when the Moon was continually bombarded by meteorites (Figure 24.15). Large meteorites broke through the Moons newly formed surface. This caused magma to flow out and fill the craters. Scientists estimate volcanic activity on the Moon ended about 1.2 billion years ago. The lighter parts on the Moon are called terrae, or highlands (Figure 24.15). They are higher than the maria and include several high mountain ranges. The rock that makes up the highlands is lighter in color and crystallized more slowly than the maria. The rock looks light because it reflects more of the Suns light. 	most of the maria are on the moons near side	true
Like Earth, the Moon has a distinct crust, mantle, and core. The crust is composed of igneous rock. This rock is rich in the elements oxygen, silicon, magnesium, and aluminum. On the near side, the Moons crust is about 60 kilometers thick. On the far side, the crust is about 100 kilometers thick. The mantle is made of rock like Earths mantle. The Moon has a small metallic core, perhaps 600 to 800 kilometers in diameter. The composition of the core is probably mostly iron with some sulfur and nickel. We learned this both from the rock samples gathered by astronauts and from spacecraft sent to the Moon. 	the lunar crust is thicker on the far side than on the near side	true
The Moon is Earths only natural satellite. The Moon is about one-fourth the size of Earth, 3,476 kilometers in diameter. Gravity on the Moon is only one-sixth as strong as it is on Earth. If you weigh 120 pounds on Earth, you would only weigh 20 pounds on the Moon. You can jump six times as high on the Moon as you can on Earth. The Moon makes no light of its own. Like every other body in the solar system, it only reflects light from the Sun. The Moon rotates on its axis once for every orbit it makes around the Earth. What does this mean? This means that the same side of the Moon always faces Earth. The side of the Moon that always faces Earth is called the near side. The side of the Moon that always faces away from Earth is called the far side (Figure 24.13). All people for all time have only seen the Moons near side. The far side has only been seen by spacecraft. The Moon has no atmosphere. With no atmosphere, the Moon is not protected from extreme temperatures. The average surface temperature during the day is approximately 107C (225F). Daytime temperatures can reach as high as 123C (253F). At night, the average temperature drops to -153C (-243F). The lowest temperatures measured are as low as -233C (-397F). 	the moon rotates on its axis once for every orbit it makes around the sun	false
The Moon is Earths only natural satellite. The Moon is about one-fourth the size of Earth, 3,476 kilometers in diameter. Gravity on the Moon is only one-sixth as strong as it is on Earth. If you weigh 120 pounds on Earth, you would only weigh 20 pounds on the Moon. You can jump six times as high on the Moon as you can on Earth. The Moon makes no light of its own. Like every other body in the solar system, it only reflects light from the Sun. The Moon rotates on its axis once for every orbit it makes around the Earth. What does this mean? This means that the same side of the Moon always faces Earth. The side of the Moon that always faces Earth is called the near side. The side of the Moon that always faces away from Earth is called the far side (Figure 24.13). All people for all time have only seen the Moons near side. The far side has only been seen by spacecraft. The Moon has no atmosphere. With no atmosphere, the Moon is not protected from extreme temperatures. The average surface temperature during the day is approximately 107C (225F). Daytime temperatures can reach as high as 123C (253F). At night, the average temperature drops to -153C (-243F). The lowest temperatures measured are as low as -233C (-397F). 	you would weigh six times as much on the moon as on earth	false
The landscape of the Moon - its surface features - is very different from Earth. The lunar landscape is covered by craters caused by asteroid impacts (Figure 24.14). The craters are bowl-shaped basins on the Moons surface. Because the Moon has no water, wind, or weather, the craters remain unchanged. The Moons coldest temperatures are found deep in the craters. The coldest craters are at the south pole on the Moons far side, where the Sun never shines. These temperatures are amongst the coldest in our entire solar system. 	surface features of a moon or planet	1.e
When you look at the Moon from Earth, you notice dark and light areas. The maria are dark, solid, flat areas of lava. Maria covers around 16% of the Moons surface, mostly on the near side. The maria formed about 3.0 to 3.5 billion years ago, when the Moon was continually bombarded by meteorites (Figure 24.15). Large meteorites broke through the Moons newly formed surface. This caused magma to flow out and fill the craters. Scientists estimate volcanic activity on the Moon ended about 1.2 billion years ago. The lighter parts on the Moon are called terrae, or highlands (Figure 24.15). They are higher than the maria and include several high mountain ranges. The rock that makes up the highlands is lighter in color and crystallized more slowly than the maria. The rock looks light because it reflects more of the Suns light. 	highlands on the moon	2.c
The landscape of the Moon - its surface features - is very different from Earth. The lunar landscape is covered by craters caused by asteroid impacts (Figure 24.14). The craters are bowl-shaped basins on the Moons surface. Because the Moon has no water, wind, or weather, the craters remain unchanged. The Moons coldest temperatures are found deep in the craters. The coldest craters are at the south pole on the Moons far side, where the Sun never shines. These temperatures are amongst the coldest in our entire solar system. 	cause of lunar craters	3.g
We all know what the Moon looks like. Its always looked the same during our lifetime. In fact, the Moon has looked the same to every person who has looked up at it for all time. Even the dinosaurs and trilobites, should they have looked up at it, would have seen the same thing. This is not true of Earth. Natural processes continually alter the Earths surface. Without these processes, would Earths surface resemble the Moons? Even though we cant see it from Earth, the Moon has changed recently too. Astronauts footprints are now on the Moon. They will remain unchanged for thousands of years, because there is no wind, rain, or living thing to disturb them. Only a falling meteorite could destroy them. 	related to the moon	4.a
When you look at the Moon from Earth, you notice dark and light areas. The maria are dark, solid, flat areas of lava. Maria covers around 16% of the Moons surface, mostly on the near side. The maria formed about 3.0 to 3.5 billion years ago, when the Moon was continually bombarded by meteorites (Figure 24.15). Large meteorites broke through the Moons newly formed surface. This caused magma to flow out and fill the craters. Scientists estimate volcanic activity on the Moon ended about 1.2 billion years ago. The lighter parts on the Moon are called terrae, or highlands (Figure 24.15). They are higher than the maria and include several high mountain ranges. The rock that makes up the highlands is lighter in color and crystallized more slowly than the maria. The rock looks light because it reflects more of the Suns light. 	flat areas of lava on the moons surface	5.b
The landscape of the Moon - its surface features - is very different from Earth. The lunar landscape is covered by craters caused by asteroid impacts (Figure 24.14). The craters are bowl-shaped basins on the Moons surface. Because the Moon has no water, wind, or weather, the craters remain unchanged. The Moons coldest temperatures are found deep in the craters. The coldest craters are at the south pole on the Moons far side, where the Sun never shines. These temperatures are amongst the coldest in our entire solar system. 	bowlshaped basin on the moons surface	6.d
The landscape of the Moon - its surface features - is very different from Earth. The lunar landscape is covered by craters caused by asteroid impacts (Figure 24.14). The craters are bowl-shaped basins on the Moons surface. Because the Moon has no water, wind, or weather, the craters remain unchanged. The Moons coldest temperatures are found deep in the craters. The coldest craters are at the south pole on the Moons far side, where the Sun never shines. These temperatures are amongst the coldest in our entire solar system. 	cause of lunar maria	7.f
The three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere. 	the sun makes up over 99 percent of the mass of the solar system	true
The core is the Suns innermost layer. The core is plasma. It has a temperature of around 15 million degrees Celsius (C). Nuclear fusion reactions create the immense temperature. In these reactions, hydrogen atoms fuse to form helium. This releases vast amounts of energy. The energy moves towards the outer layers of the Sun. Energy from the Suns core powers most of the solar system. 	the suns core is made of solid rock	false
The three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere. 	the sun has no atmosphere	false
The core is the Suns innermost layer. The core is plasma. It has a temperature of around 15 million degrees Celsius (C). Nuclear fusion reactions create the immense temperature. In these reactions, hydrogen atoms fuse to form helium. This releases vast amounts of energy. The energy moves towards the outer layers of the Sun. Energy from the Suns core powers most of the solar system. 	the suns core is molten metal	false
The core is the Suns innermost layer. The core is plasma. It has a temperature of around 15 million degrees Celsius (C). Nuclear fusion reactions create the immense temperature. In these reactions, hydrogen atoms fuse to form helium. This releases vast amounts of energy. The energy moves towards the outer layers of the Sun. Energy from the Suns core powers most of the solar system. 	the suns energy comes from reactions in which hydrogen changes to helium	true
A loop of the Suns magnetic field may break. This creates solar flares. Solar flares are violent explosions that release huge amounts of energy (Figure 24.19). The streams of high energy particles they emit make up the solar wind. Solar wind is dangerous to spacecraft and astronauts. Solar flares can even cause damage on Earth. They have knocked out entire power grids and can disturb radio, satellite, and cell phone communications. 	a solar flare can knock out power grids on earth	true
The three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere. 	energy travels through the radiative zone of the sun at the speed of light	false
The three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere. 	the part of the sun that we see shining is the convective zone	false
The three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere. 	the sun makes up 998 of the mass of the solar system	true
The three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere. 	the corona is the coolest layer of the sun	false
The three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere. 	the sun does not have a defined outer boundary	true
The Sun is made almost entirely of the elements hydrogen and helium. The Sun has no solid material. Most atoms in the Sun exist as plasma. Plasma is superheated gas with an electrical charge. Because the Sun is made of gases, it does not have a defined outer boundary. Like Earth, the Sun has an internal structure. The inner three layers make up what we would actually call the Sun. 	plasma is a solid	false
The three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere. 	sunspots occur because of magnetic activity of the sun	true
A loop of the Suns magnetic field may break. This creates solar flares. Solar flares are violent explosions that release huge amounts of energy (Figure 24.19). The streams of high energy particles they emit make up the solar wind. Solar wind is dangerous to spacecraft and astronauts. Solar flares can even cause damage on Earth. They have knocked out entire power grids and can disturb radio, satellite, and cell phone communications. 	solar wind is dangerous to spacecraft and astronauts	true
The convection zone surrounds the radiative zone. In the convection zone, hot material from near the Suns center rises. This material cools at the surface, and then plunges back downward. The material then receives more heat from the radiative zone. 	solar prominences are mountains on the suns surface	false
The convection zone surrounds the radiative zone. In the convection zone, hot material from near the Suns center rises. This material cools at the surface, and then plunges back downward. The material then receives more heat from the radiative zone. 	relatively cool dark area on the suns surface	1.g
The Sun is made almost entirely of the elements hydrogen and helium. The Sun has no solid material. Most atoms in the Sun exist as plasma. Plasma is superheated gas with an electrical charge. Because the Sun is made of gases, it does not have a defined outer boundary. Like Earth, the Sun has an internal structure. The inner three layers make up what we would actually call the Sun. 	superheated gas with an electrical charge	2.d
The three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere. 	layer of the sun that surrounds the radiative zone	3.e
The three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere. 	visible layer of the suns atmosphere	4.c
The three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere. 	layer of the suns atmosphere that glows red	5.a
The three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere. 	layer of the sun nearest the core	6.f
The three outer layers of the Sun are its atmosphere. 	hottest layer of the suns atmosphere	7.b
The Moon does not produce any light of its own. It only reflects light from the Sun. As the Moon moves around the Earth, we see different parts of the Moon lit up by the Sun. This causes the phases of the Moon. As the Moon revolves around Earth, it changes from fully lit to completely dark and back again. A full moon occurs when the whole side facing Earth is lit. This happens when Earth is between the Moon and the Sun. About one week later, the Moon enters the quarter-moon phase. Only half of the Moons lit surface is visible from Earth, so it appears as a half circle. When the Moon moves between Earth and the Sun, the side facing Earth is completely dark. This is called the new moon phase. Sometimes you can just barely make out the outline of the new moon in the sky. This is because some sunlight reflects off the Earth and hits the Moon. Before and after the quarter-moon phases are the gibbous and crescent phases. During the crescent moon phase, the Moon is less than half lit. It is seen as only a sliver or crescent shape. During the gibbous moon phase, the Moon is more than half lit. It is not full. The Moon undergoes a complete cycle of phases about every 29.5 days. 	phase of the moon in which half of the side facing earth is lit	1.b
The Moon does not produce any light of its own. It only reflects light from the Sun. As the Moon moves around the Earth, we see different parts of the Moon lit up by the Sun. This causes the phases of the Moon. As the Moon revolves around Earth, it changes from fully lit to completely dark and back again. A full moon occurs when the whole side facing Earth is lit. This happens when Earth is between the Moon and the Sun. About one week later, the Moon enters the quarter-moon phase. Only half of the Moons lit surface is visible from Earth, so it appears as a half circle. When the Moon moves between Earth and the Sun, the side facing Earth is completely dark. This is called the new moon phase. Sometimes you can just barely make out the outline of the new moon in the sky. This is because some sunlight reflects off the Earth and hits the Moon. Before and after the quarter-moon phases are the gibbous and crescent phases. During the crescent moon phase, the Moon is less than half lit. It is seen as only a sliver or crescent shape. During the gibbous moon phase, the Moon is more than half lit. It is not full. The Moon undergoes a complete cycle of phases about every 29.5 days. 	phase of the moon in which the entire side facing earth is dark	2.g
Sometimes a full moon moves through Earths shadow. This is a lunar eclipse (Figure 24.22). During a total lunar eclipse, the Moon travels completely in Earths umbra. During a partial lunar eclipse, only a portion of the Moon enters Earths umbra. When the Moon passes through Earths penumbra, it is a penumbral eclipse. Since Earths shadow is large, a lunar eclipse lasts for hours. Anyone with a view of the Moon can see a lunar eclipse. Partial lunar eclipses occur at least twice a year, but total lunar eclipses are less common. The Moon glows with a dull red coloring during a total lunar eclipse. 	event in which earth casts a shadow on the moon	3.c
Sometimes a full moon moves through Earths shadow. This is a lunar eclipse (Figure 24.22). During a total lunar eclipse, the Moon travels completely in Earths umbra. During a partial lunar eclipse, only a portion of the Moon enters Earths umbra. When the Moon passes through Earths penumbra, it is a penumbral eclipse. Since Earths shadow is large, a lunar eclipse lasts for hours. Anyone with a view of the Moon can see a lunar eclipse. Partial lunar eclipses occur at least twice a year, but total lunar eclipses are less common. The Moon glows with a dull red coloring during a total lunar eclipse. 	inner part of the moons shadow during an eclipse	4.d
Sometimes a full moon moves through Earths shadow. This is a lunar eclipse (Figure 24.22). During a total lunar eclipse, the Moon travels completely in Earths umbra. During a partial lunar eclipse, only a portion of the Moon enters Earths umbra. When the Moon passes through Earths penumbra, it is a penumbral eclipse. Since Earths shadow is large, a lunar eclipse lasts for hours. Anyone with a view of the Moon can see a lunar eclipse. Partial lunar eclipses occur at least twice a year, but total lunar eclipses are less common. The Moon glows with a dull red coloring during a total lunar eclipse. 	event in which the moon casts a shadow on earth	5.e
Sometimes a full moon moves through Earths shadow. This is a lunar eclipse (Figure 24.22). During a total lunar eclipse, the Moon travels completely in Earths umbra. During a partial lunar eclipse, only a portion of the Moon enters Earths umbra. When the Moon passes through Earths penumbra, it is a penumbral eclipse. Since Earths shadow is large, a lunar eclipse lasts for hours. Anyone with a view of the Moon can see a lunar eclipse. Partial lunar eclipses occur at least twice a year, but total lunar eclipses are less common. The Moon glows with a dull red coloring during a total lunar eclipse. 	outer part of the moons shadow during an eclipse	6.f
The Moon does not produce any light of its own. It only reflects light from the Sun. As the Moon moves around the Earth, we see different parts of the Moon lit up by the Sun. This causes the phases of the Moon. As the Moon revolves around Earth, it changes from fully lit to completely dark and back again. A full moon occurs when the whole side facing Earth is lit. This happens when Earth is between the Moon and the Sun. About one week later, the Moon enters the quarter-moon phase. Only half of the Moons lit surface is visible from Earth, so it appears as a half circle. When the Moon moves between Earth and the Sun, the side facing Earth is completely dark. This is called the new moon phase. Sometimes you can just barely make out the outline of the new moon in the sky. This is because some sunlight reflects off the Earth and hits the Moon. Before and after the quarter-moon phases are the gibbous and crescent phases. During the crescent moon phase, the Moon is less than half lit. It is seen as only a sliver or crescent shape. During the gibbous moon phase, the Moon is more than half lit. It is not full. The Moon undergoes a complete cycle of phases about every 29.5 days. 	phase of the moon in which the entire side facing earth is lit	7.a
Sometimes a full moon moves through Earths shadow. This is a lunar eclipse (Figure 24.22). During a total lunar eclipse, the Moon travels completely in Earths umbra. During a partial lunar eclipse, only a portion of the Moon enters Earths umbra. When the Moon passes through Earths penumbra, it is a penumbral eclipse. Since Earths shadow is large, a lunar eclipse lasts for hours. Anyone with a view of the Moon can see a lunar eclipse. Partial lunar eclipses occur at least twice a year, but total lunar eclipses are less common. The Moon glows with a dull red coloring during a total lunar eclipse. 	a lunar eclipse generally lasts between 510 minutes	false
When a new moon passes directly between the Earth and the Sun, it causes a solar eclipse (Figure 24.20). The Moon casts a shadow on the Earth and blocks our view of the Sun. This happens only all three are lined up and in the same plane. This plane is called the ecliptic. The ecliptic is the plane of Earths orbit around the Sun. The Moons shadow has two distinct parts. The umbra is the inner, cone-shaped part of the shadow. It is the part in which all of the light has been blocked. The penumbra is the outer part of Moons shadow. It is where the light is only partially blocked. When the Moons shadow completely blocks the Sun, it is a total solar eclipse (Figure 24.21). If only part of the Sun is out of view, it is a partial solar eclipse. Solar eclipses are rare events. They usually only last a few minutes. That is because the Moons shadow only covers a very small area on Earth and Earth is turning very rapidly. Solar eclipses are amazing to experience. It appears like night only strange. Birds may sing as they do at dusk. Stars become visible in the sky and it gets colder outside. Unlike at night, the Sun is out. So during a solar eclipse, its easy to see the Suns corona and solar prominences. This NASA page will inform you on when solar eclipses are expected: http://eclipse.gsfc.nasa.gov/solar.html 	birds may become confused during a solar eclipse and think that it is nighttime	true
Sometimes a full moon moves through Earths shadow. This is a lunar eclipse (Figure 24.22). During a total lunar eclipse, the Moon travels completely in Earths umbra. During a partial lunar eclipse, only a portion of the Moon enters Earths umbra. When the Moon passes through Earths penumbra, it is a penumbral eclipse. Since Earths shadow is large, a lunar eclipse lasts for hours. Anyone with a view of the Moon can see a lunar eclipse. Partial lunar eclipses occur at least twice a year, but total lunar eclipses are less common. The Moon glows with a dull red coloring during a total lunar eclipse. 	during a total lunar eclipse the moon is entirely dark	false
When a new moon passes directly between the Earth and the Sun, it causes a solar eclipse (Figure 24.20). The Moon casts a shadow on the Earth and blocks our view of the Sun. This happens only all three are lined up and in the same plane. This plane is called the ecliptic. The ecliptic is the plane of Earths orbit around the Sun. The Moons shadow has two distinct parts. The umbra is the inner, cone-shaped part of the shadow. It is the part in which all of the light has been blocked. The penumbra is the outer part of Moons shadow. It is where the light is only partially blocked. When the Moons shadow completely blocks the Sun, it is a total solar eclipse (Figure 24.21). If only part of the Sun is out of view, it is a partial solar eclipse. Solar eclipses are rare events. They usually only last a few minutes. That is because the Moons shadow only covers a very small area on Earth and Earth is turning very rapidly. Solar eclipses are amazing to experience. It appears like night only strange. Birds may sing as they do at dusk. Stars become visible in the sky and it gets colder outside. Unlike at night, the Sun is out. So during a solar eclipse, its easy to see the Suns corona and solar prominences. This NASA page will inform you on when solar eclipses are expected: http://eclipse.gsfc.nasa.gov/solar.html 	a solar eclipse is seen on all of the earth that is having daytime	false
The Moon does not produce any light of its own. It only reflects light from the Sun. As the Moon moves around the Earth, we see different parts of the Moon lit up by the Sun. This causes the phases of the Moon. As the Moon revolves around Earth, it changes from fully lit to completely dark and back again. A full moon occurs when the whole side facing Earth is lit. This happens when Earth is between the Moon and the Sun. About one week later, the Moon enters the quarter-moon phase. Only half of the Moons lit surface is visible from Earth, so it appears as a half circle. When the Moon moves between Earth and the Sun, the side facing Earth is completely dark. This is called the new moon phase. Sometimes you can just barely make out the outline of the new moon in the sky. This is because some sunlight reflects off the Earth and hits the Moon. Before and after the quarter-moon phases are the gibbous and crescent phases. During the crescent moon phase, the Moon is less than half lit. It is seen as only a sliver or crescent shape. During the gibbous moon phase, the Moon is more than half lit. It is not full. The Moon undergoes a complete cycle of phases about every 29.5 days. 	the time between two full moon phases is 295 days	true
Sometimes a full moon moves through Earths shadow. This is a lunar eclipse (Figure 24.22). During a total lunar eclipse, the Moon travels completely in Earths umbra. During a partial lunar eclipse, only a portion of the Moon enters Earths umbra. When the Moon passes through Earths penumbra, it is a penumbral eclipse. Since Earths shadow is large, a lunar eclipse lasts for hours. Anyone with a view of the Moon can see a lunar eclipse. Partial lunar eclipses occur at least twice a year, but total lunar eclipses are less common. The Moon glows with a dull red coloring during a total lunar eclipse. 	the coneshaped part of the moons shadow is the penumbra	false
Sometimes a full moon moves through Earths shadow. This is a lunar eclipse (Figure 24.22). During a total lunar eclipse, the Moon travels completely in Earths umbra. During a partial lunar eclipse, only a portion of the Moon enters Earths umbra. When the Moon passes through Earths penumbra, it is a penumbral eclipse. Since Earths shadow is large, a lunar eclipse lasts for hours. Anyone with a view of the Moon can see a lunar eclipse. Partial lunar eclipses occur at least twice a year, but total lunar eclipses are less common. The Moon glows with a dull red coloring during a total lunar eclipse. 	light is only partly blocked in the umbra part of a shadow	false
When a new moon passes directly between the Earth and the Sun, it causes a solar eclipse (Figure 24.20). The Moon casts a shadow on the Earth and blocks our view of the Sun. This happens only all three are lined up and in the same plane. This plane is called the ecliptic. The ecliptic is the plane of Earths orbit around the Sun. The Moons shadow has two distinct parts. The umbra is the inner, cone-shaped part of the shadow. It is the part in which all of the light has been blocked. The penumbra is the outer part of Moons shadow. It is where the light is only partially blocked. When the Moons shadow completely blocks the Sun, it is a total solar eclipse (Figure 24.21). If only part of the Sun is out of view, it is a partial solar eclipse. Solar eclipses are rare events. They usually only last a few minutes. That is because the Moons shadow only covers a very small area on Earth and Earth is turning very rapidly. Solar eclipses are amazing to experience. It appears like night only strange. Birds may sing as they do at dusk. Stars become visible in the sky and it gets colder outside. Unlike at night, the Sun is out. So during a solar eclipse, its easy to see the Suns corona and solar prominences. This NASA page will inform you on when solar eclipses are expected: http://eclipse.gsfc.nasa.gov/solar.html 	solar eclipses are rare events	true
Sometimes a full moon moves through Earths shadow. This is a lunar eclipse (Figure 24.22). During a total lunar eclipse, the Moon travels completely in Earths umbra. During a partial lunar eclipse, only a portion of the Moon enters Earths umbra. When the Moon passes through Earths penumbra, it is a penumbral eclipse. Since Earths shadow is large, a lunar eclipse lasts for hours. Anyone with a view of the Moon can see a lunar eclipse. Partial lunar eclipses occur at least twice a year, but total lunar eclipses are less common. The Moon glows with a dull red coloring during a total lunar eclipse. 	during a partial lunar eclipse only part of the moon enters earths umbra	true
Sometimes a full moon moves through Earths shadow. This is a lunar eclipse (Figure 24.22). During a total lunar eclipse, the Moon travels completely in Earths umbra. During a partial lunar eclipse, only a portion of the Moon enters Earths umbra. When the Moon passes through Earths penumbra, it is a penumbral eclipse. Since Earths shadow is large, a lunar eclipse lasts for hours. Anyone with a view of the Moon can see a lunar eclipse. Partial lunar eclipses occur at least twice a year, but total lunar eclipses are less common. The Moon glows with a dull red coloring during a total lunar eclipse. 	a total lunar eclipse occurs once every month	false
The Moon does not produce any light of its own. It only reflects light from the Sun. As the Moon moves around the Earth, we see different parts of the Moon lit up by the Sun. This causes the phases of the Moon. As the Moon revolves around Earth, it changes from fully lit to completely dark and back again. A full moon occurs when the whole side facing Earth is lit. This happens when Earth is between the Moon and the Sun. About one week later, the Moon enters the quarter-moon phase. Only half of the Moons lit surface is visible from Earth, so it appears as a half circle. When the Moon moves between Earth and the Sun, the side facing Earth is completely dark. This is called the new moon phase. Sometimes you can just barely make out the outline of the new moon in the sky. This is because some sunlight reflects off the Earth and hits the Moon. Before and after the quarter-moon phases are the gibbous and crescent phases. During the crescent moon phase, the Moon is less than half lit. It is seen as only a sliver or crescent shape. During the gibbous moon phase, the Moon is more than half lit. It is not full. The Moon undergoes a complete cycle of phases about every 29.5 days. 	the full moon phase occurs when the moon is on the opposite side of earth from the sun	true
The Moon does not produce any light of its own. It only reflects light from the Sun. As the Moon moves around the Earth, we see different parts of the Moon lit up by the Sun. This causes the phases of the Moon. As the Moon revolves around Earth, it changes from fully lit to completely dark and back again. A full moon occurs when the whole side facing Earth is lit. This happens when Earth is between the Moon and the Sun. About one week later, the Moon enters the quarter-moon phase. Only half of the Moons lit surface is visible from Earth, so it appears as a half circle. When the Moon moves between Earth and the Sun, the side facing Earth is completely dark. This is called the new moon phase. Sometimes you can just barely make out the outline of the new moon in the sky. This is because some sunlight reflects off the Earth and hits the Moon. Before and after the quarter-moon phases are the gibbous and crescent phases. During the crescent moon phase, the Moon is less than half lit. It is seen as only a sliver or crescent shape. During the gibbous moon phase, the Moon is more than half lit. It is not full. The Moon undergoes a complete cycle of phases about every 29.5 days. 	a crescent phase follows the first quarter phase of the moon	false
Sometimes a full moon moves through Earths shadow. This is a lunar eclipse (Figure 24.22). During a total lunar eclipse, the Moon travels completely in Earths umbra. During a partial lunar eclipse, only a portion of the Moon enters Earths umbra. When the Moon passes through Earths penumbra, it is a penumbral eclipse. Since Earths shadow is large, a lunar eclipse lasts for hours. Anyone with a view of the Moon can see a lunar eclipse. Partial lunar eclipses occur at least twice a year, but total lunar eclipses are less common. The Moon glows with a dull red coloring during a total lunar eclipse. 	if the new moon occurs on the 1st of the month the full moon will occur on the 28th of the month	false
The Moon does not produce any light of its own. It only reflects light from the Sun. As the Moon moves around the Earth, we see different parts of the Moon lit up by the Sun. This causes the phases of the Moon. As the Moon revolves around Earth, it changes from fully lit to completely dark and back again. A full moon occurs when the whole side facing Earth is lit. This happens when Earth is between the Moon and the Sun. About one week later, the Moon enters the quarter-moon phase. Only half of the Moons lit surface is visible from Earth, so it appears as a half circle. When the Moon moves between Earth and the Sun, the side facing Earth is completely dark. This is called the new moon phase. Sometimes you can just barely make out the outline of the new moon in the sky. This is because some sunlight reflects off the Earth and hits the Moon. Before and after the quarter-moon phases are the gibbous and crescent phases. During the crescent moon phase, the Moon is less than half lit. It is seen as only a sliver or crescent shape. During the gibbous moon phase, the Moon is more than half lit. It is not full. The Moon undergoes a complete cycle of phases about every 29.5 days. 	when a lunar eclipse occurs the sun cannot be seen from earth	false
The Moon does not produce any light of its own. It only reflects light from the Sun. As the Moon moves around the Earth, we see different parts of the Moon lit up by the Sun. This causes the phases of the Moon. As the Moon revolves around Earth, it changes from fully lit to completely dark and back again. A full moon occurs when the whole side facing Earth is lit. This happens when Earth is between the Moon and the Sun. About one week later, the Moon enters the quarter-moon phase. Only half of the Moons lit surface is visible from Earth, so it appears as a half circle. When the Moon moves between Earth and the Sun, the side facing Earth is completely dark. This is called the new moon phase. Sometimes you can just barely make out the outline of the new moon in the sky. This is because some sunlight reflects off the Earth and hits the Moon. Before and after the quarter-moon phases are the gibbous and crescent phases. During the crescent moon phase, the Moon is less than half lit. It is seen as only a sliver or crescent shape. During the gibbous moon phase, the Moon is more than half lit. It is not full. The Moon undergoes a complete cycle of phases about every 29.5 days. 	when a solar eclipse occurs the moon cannot be seen from earth	false
To figure out how the solar system formed, we need to put together what we have learned. There are two other important features to consider. First, all the planets orbit in nearly the same flat, disk-like region. Second, all the planets orbit in the same direction around the Sun. These two features are clues to how the solar system formed. 	collection of many small objects beyond the orbit of neptune	1.b
About 1,500 years after Ptolemy, Copernicus proposed a startling idea. He suggested that the Sun is at the center of the universe. Copernicus developed his model because it better explained the motions of the planets. Figure 25.2 shows both the Earth-centered and Sun-centered models. Copernicus did not publish his new model until his death. He knew that it was heresy to say that Earth was not the center of the universe. It wasnt until Galileo developed his telescope that people would take the Copernican 	distance from earth to the sun	2.a
To figure out how the solar system formed, we need to put together what we have learned. There are two other important features to consider. First, all the planets orbit in nearly the same flat, disk-like region. Second, all the planets orbit in the same direction around the Sun. These two features are clues to how the solar system formed. 	star and the planets that orbit it	3.e
The Sun and all the objects that are held by the Suns gravity are known as the solar system. These objects all revolve around the Sun. The ancient Greeks recognized five planets. These lights in the night sky changed their position against the background of stars. They appeared to wander. In fact, the word planet comes from a Greek word meaning wanderer. These objects were thought to be important, so they named them after gods from their mythology. The names for the planets Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn came from the names of gods and a goddess. 	collection of many small objects between the orbits of mars and jupiter	4.f
Since the early 1990s, astronomers have discovered other solar systems. A solar system has one or more planets orbiting one or more stars. We call these planets extrasolar planets, or exoplanets. They are called exoplanets because they orbit a star other than the Sun. As of June 2013, 891 exoplanets have been found. More exoplanets are found all the time. You can check out how many we have found at http://planetquest.jpl.nasa.gov/. We have been able to take pictures of only a few exoplanets. Most are discovered because of some tell-tale signs. One sign is a very slight motion of a star that must be caused by the pull of a planet. Another sign is the partial dimming of a stars light as the planet passes in front of it. 	planet that orbits a star other than the sun	5.g
Youve probably heard about Pluto. When it was discovered in 1930, Pluto was called the ninth planet. Astronomers later found out that Pluto was not like other planets. For one thing, what they were calling Pluto was not a single object. They were actually seeing Pluto and its moon, Charon. In older telescopes, they looked like one object. This one object looked big enough to be a planet. Alone, Pluto was not very big. Astronomers also discovered many objects like Pluto. They were rocky and icy and there were a whole lot of them. Astronomers were faced with a problem. They needed to call these other objects planets. Or they needed to decide that Pluto was something else. In 2006, these scientists decided what a planet is. According to the new definition, a planet must: Orbit a star. Be big enough that its own gravity causes it to be round. Be small enough that it isnt a star itself. Have cleared the area of its orbit of smaller objects. If the first three are true but not the fourth, then that object is a dwarf planet. We now call Pluto a dwarf planet. There are other dwarf planets in the solar system. They are Eris, Ceres, Makemake and Haumea. There are many other reasons why Pluto does not fit with the other planets in our solar system. 	planet such as pluto	6.d
Scientists think the solar system formed from a big cloud of gas and dust, called a nebula. This is the solar nebula hypothesis. The nebula was made mostly of hydrogen and helium. There were heavier elements too. Gravity caused the nebula to contract (Figure 25.6). As the nebula contracted, it started to spin. As it got smaller and smaller, it spun faster and faster. This is what happens when an ice skater pulls her arms to her sides during a spin move. She spins faster. The spinning caused the nebula to form into a disk shape. This model explains why all the planets are found in the flat, disk-shaped region. It also explains why all the planets revolve in the same direction. The solar system formed from the nebula about 4.6 billion years ago 	giant cloud of gas and dust	7.c
To figure out how the solar system formed, we need to put together what we have learned. There are two other important features to consider. First, all the planets orbit in nearly the same flat, disk-like region. Second, all the planets orbit in the same direction around the Sun. These two features are clues to how the solar system formed. 	if you know a planets orbit you can determine its approximate distance from the sun	true
Today we know that we have eight planets, five dwarf planets, over 165 moons, and many, many asteroids and other small objects in our solar system. We also know that the Sun is not the center of the universe. But it is the center of the solar system. Figure 25.3 shows our solar system. The planets are Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. Table 25.1 gives some data on the mass and diameter of the Sun and planets relative to Earth. Object Mass (Relative to Earth) Sun Mercury Venus Earth Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus 333,000 Earths mass 0.06 Earths mass 0.82 Earths mass 1.00 Earths mass 0.11 Earths mass 317.8 Earths mass 95.2 Earths mass 14.6 Earths mass Diameter of Planet (Relative to Earth) 109.2 Earths diameter 0.39 Earths diameter 0.95 Earths diameter 1.00 Earths diameter 0.53 Earths diameter 11.21 Earths diameter 9.41 Earths diameter 3.98 Earths diameter Neptune 17.2 Earths mass 	the planets in order from the sun are mars venus earth mercury saturn uranus jupiter and neptune	false
Planets are held in their orbits by the force of gravity. What would happen without gravity? Imagine that you are swinging a ball on a string in a circular motion. Now let go of the string. The ball will fly away from you in a straight line. It was the string pulling on the ball that kept the ball moving in a circle. The motion of a planet is very similar to the ball on a string. The force pulling the planet is the pull of gravity between the planet and the Sun. Every object is attracted to every other object by gravity. The force of gravity between two objects depends on the mass of the objects. It also depends on how far apart the objects are. When you are sitting next to your dog, there is a gravitational force between the two of you. That force is far too weak for you to notice. You can feel the force of gravity between you and Earth because Earth has a lot of mass. The force of gravity between the Sun and planets is also very large. This is because the Sun and the planets are very large objects. Gravity is great enough to hold the planets to the Sun even though the distances between them are enormous. Gravity also holds moons in orbit around planets. 	the orbits of the planets are circular	false
About 1,500 years after Ptolemy, Copernicus proposed a startling idea. He suggested that the Sun is at the center of the universe. Copernicus developed his model because it better explained the motions of the planets. Figure 25.2 shows both the Earth-centered and Sun-centered models. Copernicus did not publish his new model until his death. He knew that it was heresy to say that Earth was not the center of the universe. It wasnt until Galileo developed his telescope that people would take the Copernican 	one astronomical unit is the distance from earth to sun	true
To figure out how the solar system formed, we need to put together what we have learned. There are two other important features to consider. First, all the planets orbit in nearly the same flat, disk-like region. Second, all the planets orbit in the same direction around the Sun. These two features are clues to how the solar system formed. 	all of the planets in the solar system rotate in the same direction	false
The Sun and all the objects that are held by the Suns gravity are known as the solar system. These objects all revolve around the Sun. The ancient Greeks recognized five planets. These lights in the night sky changed their position against the background of stars. They appeared to wander. In fact, the word planet comes from a Greek word meaning wanderer. These objects were thought to be important, so they named them after gods from their mythology. The names for the planets Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn came from the names of gods and a goddess. 	the planets in our solar system were named for greek gods and goddesses	true
About 1,500 years after Ptolemy, Copernicus proposed a startling idea. He suggested that the Sun is at the center of the universe. Copernicus developed his model because it better explained the motions of the planets. Figure 25.2 shows both the Earth-centered and Sun-centered models. Copernicus did not publish his new model until his death. He knew that it was heresy to say that Earth was not the center of the universe. It wasnt until Galileo developed his telescope that people would take the Copernican 	we now know that the sun is the center of the universe	false
To figure out how the solar system formed, we need to put together what we have learned. There are two other important features to consider. First, all the planets orbit in nearly the same flat, disk-like region. Second, all the planets orbit in the same direction around the Sun. These two features are clues to how the solar system formed. 	scientists think that our solar system formed from an asteroid belt	false
To figure out how the solar system formed, we need to put together what we have learned. There are two other important features to consider. First, all the planets orbit in nearly the same flat, disk-like region. Second, all the planets orbit in the same direction around the Sun. These two features are clues to how the solar system formed. 	the planets formed when pieces of matter collided and clumped together	true
To figure out how the solar system formed, we need to put together what we have learned. There are two other important features to consider. First, all the planets orbit in nearly the same flat, disk-like region. Second, all the planets orbit in the same direction around the Sun. These two features are clues to how the solar system formed. 	our solar system contains five dwarf planets	true
The Sun and all the objects that are held by the Suns gravity are known as the solar system. These objects all revolve around the Sun. The ancient Greeks recognized five planets. These lights in the night sky changed their position against the background of stars. They appeared to wander. In fact, the word planet comes from a Greek word meaning wanderer. These objects were thought to be important, so they named them after gods from their mythology. The names for the planets Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn came from the names of gods and a goddess. 	the planet closest to the sun is venus	false
Today we know that we have eight planets, five dwarf planets, over 165 moons, and many, many asteroids and other small objects in our solar system. We also know that the Sun is not the center of the universe. But it is the center of the solar system. Figure 25.3 shows our solar system. The planets are Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. Table 25.1 gives some data on the mass and diameter of the Sun and planets relative to Earth. Object Mass (Relative to Earth) Sun Mercury Venus Earth Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus 333,000 Earths mass 0.06 Earths mass 0.82 Earths mass 1.00 Earths mass 0.11 Earths mass 317.8 Earths mass 95.2 Earths mass 14.6 Earths mass Diameter of Planet (Relative to Earth) 109.2 Earths diameter 0.39 Earths diameter 0.95 Earths diameter 1.00 Earths diameter 0.53 Earths diameter 11.21 Earths diameter 9.41 Earths diameter 3.98 Earths diameter Neptune 17.2 Earths mass 	the planet with the greatest mass and diameter is saturn	false
To figure out how the solar system formed, we need to put together what we have learned. There are two other important features to consider. First, all the planets orbit in nearly the same flat, disk-like region. Second, all the planets orbit in the same direction around the Sun. These two features are clues to how the solar system formed. 	planets farther from the sun have orbits that are farther apart	true
To figure out how the solar system formed, we need to put together what we have learned. There are two other important features to consider. First, all the planets orbit in nearly the same flat, disk-like region. Second, all the planets orbit in the same direction around the Sun. These two features are clues to how the solar system formed. 	the orbits of the planets are nearly circular	true
To figure out how the solar system formed, we need to put together what we have learned. There are two other important features to consider. First, all the planets orbit in nearly the same flat, disk-like region. Second, all the planets orbit in the same direction around the Sun. These two features are clues to how the solar system formed. 	our sun is the only star that has planets revolving around it	false
Viewed from Earth, Mars is red. This is due to large amounts of iron in the soil. The ancient Greeks and Romans named the planet Mars after the god of war. The planets red color reminded them of blood. Mars has only a very thin atmosphere, made up mostly of carbon dioxide. 	hottest of all the planets in the solar system	1.g
Water on Mars cant be a liquid. This is because the pressure of the atmosphere is too low. The planet does have a lot of water; it is in the form of ice. The south pole of Mars has a very visible ice cap. Scientists also have evidence that there is also a lot of ice just under the Martian surface. The ice melts when volcanoes erupt. At this times liquid water flows across the surface. Scientists think that there was once liquid water on the planet. There are many surface features that look like water- eroded canyons. The Mars rover collected round clumps of crystals that, on Earth, usually form in water. If there was liquid water on Mars, life might have existed there in the past. 	rover that explored mars surface	2.b
The Earth is divided into many plates. These plates move around on the surface. The plates collide or slide past each other. One may even plunge beneath another. Plate motions cause most geological activity. This activity includes earthquakes, volcanoes, and the buildup of mountains. The reason for plate movement is convection in the mantle. Earth is the only planet that we know has plate tectonics. 	only planet in the solar system known to have plate tectonics	3.e
Earth is the third planet out from the Sun, shown in Figure 25.14. Because it is our planet, we know a lot more about Earth than we do about any other planet. What are main features of Earth? 	any of the four planets closest to the sun	4.d
Viewed from Earth, Mars is red. This is due to large amounts of iron in the soil. The ancient Greeks and Romans named the planet Mars after the god of war. The planets red color reminded them of blood. Mars has only a very thin atmosphere, made up mostly of carbon dioxide. 	smallest of all the planets in the solar system	5.a
Mercury is named for the Roman messenger god. Mercury was a messenger because he could run extremely fast. The Greeks gave the planet this name because Mercury moves very quickly in its orbit around the Sun. Mercury orbits the Sun in just 88 Earth days. Mercury has a very short year, but it also has very long days. Mercury rotates slowly on its axis, turning exactly three times for every two times it orbits the Sun. Therefore, each day on Mercury is 58 Earth days long. 	spacecraft that is orbiting and studying mercury	6.f
Earth is the third planet out from the Sun, shown in Figure 25.14. Because it is our planet, we know a lot more about Earth than we do about any other planet. What are main features of Earth? 	planet with the largest volcano in the solar system	7.c
Figure 25.10 shows a diagram of Mercurys interior. Mercury is one of the densest planets. Scientists think that the interior contains a large core made mostly of melted iron. Mercurys core takes up about 42% of the planets volume. Mercurys highly cratered surface is evidence that Mercury is not geologically active. 	all of the inner planets were once geologically active	true
Named after the Roman goddess of love, Venus is the only planet named after a female. Venus is sometimes called Earths sister planet. But just how similar is Venus to Earth? Venus is our nearest neighbor. Venus is most like Earth in size. 	venus has the largest greenhouse effect of the inner planets	true
Earth is the third planet out from the Sun, shown in Figure 25.14. Because it is our planet, we know a lot more about Earth than we do about any other planet. What are main features of Earth? 	venus is the only inner planet with a large moon besides earth	false
Earth is the third planet out from the Sun, shown in Figure 25.14. Because it is our planet, we know a lot more about Earth than we do about any other planet. What are main features of Earth? 	besides earth the inner planets are all solid	false
Viewed from Earth, Mars is red. This is due to large amounts of iron in the soil. The ancient Greeks and Romans named the planet Mars after the god of war. The planets red color reminded them of blood. Mars has only a very thin atmosphere, made up mostly of carbon dioxide. 	the inner planets spin faster than the outer planets	false
Viewed from Earth, Mars is red. This is due to large amounts of iron in the soil. The ancient Greeks and Romans named the planet Mars after the god of war. The planets red color reminded them of blood. Mars has only a very thin atmosphere, made up mostly of carbon dioxide. 	none of the inner planets of the solar system has rings	true
Viewed from Earth, Mars is red. This is due to large amounts of iron in the soil. The ancient Greeks and Romans named the planet Mars after the god of war. The planets red color reminded them of blood. Mars has only a very thin atmosphere, made up mostly of carbon dioxide. 	compared with the outer planets the inner planets spin more quickly	false
Viewed from Earth, Mars is red. This is due to large amounts of iron in the soil. The ancient Greeks and Romans named the planet Mars after the god of war. The planets red color reminded them of blood. Mars has only a very thin atmosphere, made up mostly of carbon dioxide. 	all of the inner planets are made of cooled igneous rock	true
Mercury is named for the Roman messenger god. Mercury was a messenger because he could run extremely fast. The Greeks gave the planet this name because Mercury moves very quickly in its orbit around the Sun. Mercury orbits the Sun in just 88 Earth days. Mercury has a very short year, but it also has very long days. Mercury rotates slowly on its axis, turning exactly three times for every two times it orbits the Sun. Therefore, each day on Mercury is 58 Earth days long. 	each year on mercury lasts just 58 earth days	false
Mercury is named for the Roman messenger god. Mercury was a messenger because he could run extremely fast. The Greeks gave the planet this name because Mercury moves very quickly in its orbit around the Sun. Mercury orbits the Sun in just 88 Earth days. Mercury has a very short year, but it also has very long days. Mercury rotates slowly on its axis, turning exactly three times for every two times it orbits the Sun. Therefore, each day on Mercury is 58 Earth days long. 	most of mercury is extremely wet	false
Named after the Roman goddess of love, Venus is the only planet named after a female. Venus is sometimes called Earths sister planet. But just how similar is Venus to Earth? Venus is our nearest neighbor. Venus is most like Earth in size. 	clouds on venus contain sulfur	true
Named after the Roman goddess of love, Venus is the only planet named after a female. Venus is sometimes called Earths sister planet. But just how similar is Venus to Earth? Venus is our nearest neighbor. Venus is most like Earth in size. 	a day on venus is longer than a year on venus	true
Earth is the third planet out from the Sun, shown in Figure 25.14. Because it is our planet, we know a lot more about Earth than we do about any other planet. What are main features of Earth? 	life could evolve on earth because its atmosphere contained oxygen	false
Water on Mars cant be a liquid. This is because the pressure of the atmosphere is too low. The planet does have a lot of water; it is in the form of ice. The south pole of Mars has a very visible ice cap. Scientists also have evidence that there is also a lot of ice just under the Martian surface. The ice melts when volcanoes erupt. At this times liquid water flows across the surface. Scientists think that there was once liquid water on the planet. There are many surface features that look like water- eroded canyons. The Mars rover collected round clumps of crystals that, on Earth, usually form in water. If there was liquid water on Mars, life might have existed there in the past. 	some features on mars surface look as though they were eroded by water	true
Mars has two very small, irregular moons, Phobos (seen in Figure 25.18) and Deimos. These moons were discovered in 1877. They are named after the two sons of Ares, who followed their father into war. The moons were probably asteroids that were captured by Martian gravity. 	mars moons were meteorites that were captured by martian gravity	false
Pluto was once considered one of the outer planets, but when the definition of a planet was changed in 2006, Pluto became one of the dwarf planets. It is one of the largest and brightest objects that make up this group. Look for Pluto in the next lesson, in the discussion of dwarf planets. 	saturn is the only planet with rings	false
Since Jupiter is a gas giant, could a spacecraft land on its surface? The answer is no. There is no solid surface at all! Jupiter is made mostly of hydrogen, with some helium, and small amounts of other elements. The outer layers of the planet are gas. Deeper within the planet, the intense pressure condenses the gases into a liquid. Jupiter may have a small rocky core at its center. 	jupiter may have a small rocky core	true
Saturn, shown in Figure 25.22, is famous for its beautiful rings. Saturn is the second largest planet in the solar system. Saturns mass is about 95 times Earths mass. The gas giant is 755 times Earths volume. Despite its large size, Saturn is the least dense planet in our solar system. Saturn is actually less dense than water. This means that if there were a bathtub big enough, Saturn would float! In Roman mythology, Saturn was the father of Jupiter. Saturn orbits the Sun once about every 30 Earth years. Saturns composition is similar to Jupiters. The planet is made mostly of hydrogen and helium. These elements are gases in the outer layers and liquids in the deeper layers. Saturn may also have a small solid core. Saturns upper atmosphere has clouds in bands of different colors. These clouds rotate rapidly around the planet. But Saturn has fewer storms than Jupiter. Thunder and lightning have been seen in the storms on Saturn (Figure 25.23). 	jupiter has fewer than 30 moons	false
As of 2011, over 60 moons have been identified around Saturn. Only seven of Saturns moons are round. All but one is smaller than Earths Moon. Some of the very small moons are found within the rings. All the particles in the rings are like little moons, because they orbit around Saturn. Someone must decide which ones are large enough to call moons. Saturns largest moon, Titan, is about one and a half times the size of Earths Moon. Titan is even larger than the planet Mercury. Figure 25.25 compares the size of Titan to Earth. Scientists are very interested in Titan. The moon has an atmosphere that is thought to be like Earths first atmosphere. This atmosphere was around before life developed on Earth. Like Jupiters moon, Europa, Titan may have a layer of liquid water under a layer of ice. Scientists now think that there are lakes on Titans surface. Dont take a dip, though. These lakes contain liquid methane and ethane instead of water! Methane and ethane are compounds found in natural gas. 	jupiters moon europa has some conditions suitable for life	true
All of the planets rotate on their axes in the same direction that they move around the Sun. Except for Uranus. Uranus is tilted on its side. Its axis is almost parallel to its orbit. So Uranus rolls along like a bowling ball as it revolves around the Sun. How did Uranus get this way? Scientists think that the planet was struck and knocked over by another planet-sized object. This collision probably took place billions of years ago. 	thunderstorms have been observed on uranus	false
Like the other outer planets, Neptune has rings of ice and dust. These rings are much thinner and fainter than Saturns. Neptunes rings may be unstable. They may change or disappear in a relatively short time. Neptune has 13 known moons. Only Triton, shown in Figure 25.30, has enough mass to be round. Triton orbits in the direction opposite to Neptunes orbit. Scientists think Triton did not form around Neptune. The satellite was captured by Neptunes gravity as it passed by. 	saturns rings were first observed by the hubble space telescope	false
All of the planets rotate on their axes in the same direction that they move around the Sun. Except for Uranus. Uranus is tilted on its side. Its axis is almost parallel to its orbit. So Uranus rolls along like a bowling ball as it revolves around the Sun. How did Uranus get this way? Scientists think that the planet was struck and knocked over by another planet-sized object. This collision probably took place billions of years ago. 	uranus is tilted sideways because of the pull of neptunes gravity	false
Neptune is shown in Figure 25.29. It is the eighth planet from the Sun. Neptune is so far away you need a telescope to see it from Earth. Neptune is the most distant planet in our solar system. It is nearly 4.5 billion kilometers (2.8 billion miles) from the Sun. One orbit around the Sun takes Neptune 165 Earth years. Scientists guessed Neptunes existence before it was discovered. Uranus did not always appear exactly where it should. They said this was because a planet beyond Uranus was pulling on it. This gravitational pull was affecting its orbit. Neptune was discovered in 1846. It was just where scientists predicted it would be! Due to its blue color, the planet was named Neptune for the Roman god of the sea. Uranus and Neptune are often considered sister planets. They are very similar to each other. Neptune has slightly more mass than Uranus, but it is slightly smaller in size. 	neptune is so far from earth that it can be seen only with a telescope	true
Like the other outer planets, Neptune has rings of ice and dust. These rings are much thinner and fainter than Saturns. Neptunes rings may be unstable. They may change or disappear in a relatively short time. Neptune has 13 known moons. Only Triton, shown in Figure 25.30, has enough mass to be round. Triton orbits in the direction opposite to Neptunes orbit. Scientists think Triton did not form around Neptune. The satellite was captured by Neptunes gravity as it passed by. 	scientists think that neptunes moon triton was once part of neptune	false
Pluto was once considered one of the outer planets, but when the definition of a planet was changed in 2006, Pluto became one of the dwarf planets. It is one of the largest and brightest objects that make up this group. Look for Pluto in the next lesson, in the discussion of dwarf planets. 	largest planet in the solar system	1.e
Jupiter, shown in Figure 25.19, is the largest planet in our solar system. Jupiter is named for the king of the gods in Roman mythology. Jupiter is truly a giant! The planet has 318 times the mass of Earth, and over 1,300 times Earths volume. So Jupiter is much less dense than Earth. Because Jupiter is so large, it reflects a lot of sunlight. When it is visible, it is the brightest object in the night sky besides the Moon and Venus. Jupiter is quite far from the Earth. The planet is more than five times as far from Earth as the Sun. It takes Jupiter about 12 Earth years to orbit once around the Sun. 	it takes jupiter 5 earth years to make one orbit around the sun	false
All of the planets rotate on their axes in the same direction that they move around the Sun. Except for Uranus. Uranus is tilted on its side. Its axis is almost parallel to its orbit. So Uranus rolls along like a bowling ball as it revolves around the Sun. How did Uranus get this way? Scientists think that the planet was struck and knocked over by another planet-sized object. This collision probably took place billions of years ago. 	only planet that is tilted on its side	2.g
Like the other outer planets, Neptune has rings of ice and dust. These rings are much thinner and fainter than Saturns. Neptunes rings may be unstable. They may change or disappear in a relatively short time. Neptune has 13 known moons. Only Triton, shown in Figure 25.30, has enough mass to be round. Triton orbits in the direction opposite to Neptunes orbit. Scientists think Triton did not form around Neptune. The satellite was captured by Neptunes gravity as it passed by. 	most moons in the solar system are captured asteroids	true
Pluto was once considered one of the outer planets, but when the definition of a planet was changed in 2006, Pluto became one of the dwarf planets. It is one of the largest and brightest objects that make up this group. Look for Pluto in the next lesson, in the discussion of dwarf planets. 	planet with stronger winds than any other planet in the solar system	3.c
Pluto was once considered one of the outer planets, but when the definition of a planet was changed in 2006, Pluto became one of the dwarf planets. It is one of the largest and brightest objects that make up this group. Look for Pluto in the next lesson, in the discussion of dwarf planets. 	jupiters four largest moons are larger than the dwarf planet pluto	true
There is a strange feature at Saturns north pole. The clouds form a hexagonal pattern, as shown in the infrared image in Figure 25.24. This hexagon was viewed by Voyager 1 in the 1980s. It was still there when the Cassini Orbiter visited in 2006. No one is sure why the clouds form this pattern. 	gap in the clouds on neptune	4.a
Pluto was once considered one of the outer planets, but when the definition of a planet was changed in 2006, Pluto became one of the dwarf planets. It is one of the largest and brightest objects that make up this group. Look for Pluto in the next lesson, in the discussion of dwarf planets. 	circular cloud of dust and other small particles that orbit an outer planet	5.d
Jupiter has lots of moons. As of 2011, we have discovered over 60 natural satellites of Jupiter. Four are big enough and bright enough to be seen from Earth using a pair of binoculars. These four moons were first discovered by Galileo in 1610. They are called the Galilean moons. Figure 25.21 shows the four Galilean moons and their sizes relative to Jupiters Great Red Spot. These moons are named Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto. The Galilean moons are larger than even the biggest dwarf planets, Pluto and Eris. Ganymede is the biggest moon in the solar system. It is even larger than the planet Mercury! Scientists think that Europa is a good place to look for extraterrestrial life. Europa is the smallest of the Galilean moons. The moons surface is a smooth layer of ice. Scientists think that the ice may sit on top of an ocean of liquid water. How could Europa have liquid water when it is so far from the Sun? Europa is heated by Jupiter. Jupiters tidal forces are so great that they stretch and squash its moon. This could produce enough heat for there to be liquid water. Numerous missions have been planned to explore Europa, including plans to drill through the ice and send a probe into the ocean. However, no such mission has yet been attempted. In 1979, two spacecrafts, Voyager 1 and Voyager 2, visited Jupiter and its moons. Photos from the Voyager missions 	astronauts have tested samples from europa for signs extraterrestrial life	false
Pluto was once considered one of the outer planets, but when the definition of a planet was changed in 2006, Pluto became one of the dwarf planets. It is one of the largest and brightest objects that make up this group. Look for Pluto in the next lesson, in the discussion of dwarf planets. 	saturn is unique because it is the only planet with rings	false
Jupiter, shown in Figure 25.19, is the largest planet in our solar system. Jupiter is named for the king of the gods in Roman mythology. Jupiter is truly a giant! The planet has 318 times the mass of Earth, and over 1,300 times Earths volume. So Jupiter is much less dense than Earth. Because Jupiter is so large, it reflects a lot of sunlight. When it is visible, it is the brightest object in the night sky besides the Moon and Venus. Jupiter is quite far from the Earth. The planet is more than five times as far from Earth as the Sun. It takes Jupiter about 12 Earth years to orbit once around the Sun. 	least dense planet in the solar system	6.b
Jupiters atmosphere is unlike any other in the solar system! The upper layer contains clouds of ammonia. The ammonia is different colored bands. These bands rotate around the planet. The ammonia also swirls around in tremendous storms. The Great Red Spot, shown in Figure 25.20, is Jupiters most noticeable feature. The spot is an enormous, oval-shaped storm. It is more than three times as wide as the entire Earth! Clouds in the storm rotate counterclockwise. They make one complete turn every six days or so. The Great Red Spot has been on Jupiter for at least 300 years. It may have been observed as early as 1664. It is possible that this storm is a permanent feature on Jupiter. No one knows for sure. 	enormous storm on jupiter	7.f
Hundreds of thousands of asteroids have been found in our solar system. They are still being discovered at a rate of about 5,000 new asteroids per month! The majority are located in between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. This region is called the asteroid belt, as shown in Figure 25.32. There are many thousands of asteroids in the asteroid belt. Still, their total mass adds up to only about 4 percent of Earths Moon. Asteroids formed at the same time as the rest of the solar system. Although there are many in the asteroid belt, they were never were able to form into a planet. Jupiters gravity kept them apart. 	most asteroids in the solar system are located between mars and earth	false
Hundreds of thousands of asteroids have been found in our solar system. They are still being discovered at a rate of about 5,000 new asteroids per month! The majority are located in between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. This region is called the asteroid belt, as shown in Figure 25.32. There are many thousands of asteroids in the asteroid belt. Still, their total mass adds up to only about 4 percent of Earths Moon. Asteroids formed at the same time as the rest of the solar system. Although there are many in the asteroid belt, they were never were able to form into a planet. Jupiters gravity kept them apart. 	asteroids formed after the rest of the solar system formed	false
Near-Earth asteroids have orbits that cross Earths orbit. This means that they can collide with Earth. There are over 4,500 known near-Earth asteroids. Small asteroids do sometimes collide with Earth. An asteroid about 510 m in diameter hits about once per year. Five hundred to a thousand of the known near-Earth asteroids are much bigger. They are over 1 kilometer in diameter. When large asteroids hit Earth in the past, many organisms died. At times, many species became extinct. Astronomers keep looking for near-Earth asteroids. They hope to predict a possible collision early so they can to try to stop it. 	small asteroids sometimes collide with earth	true
If you look at the sky on a dark night, you may see a meteor, like in Figure 25.33. A meteor forms a streak of light across the sky. People call them shooting stars because thats what they look like. But meteors are not stars at all. The light you see comes from a small piece of matter burning up as it flies through Earths atmosphere. 	all shooting stars become meteorites	false
If you look at the sky on a dark night, you may see a meteor, like in Figure 25.33. A meteor forms a streak of light across the sky. People call them shooting stars because thats what they look like. But meteors are not stars at all. The light you see comes from a small piece of matter burning up as it flies through Earths atmosphere. 	after a meteor hits earths surface it is called a meteorite	true
Hundreds of thousands of asteroids have been found in our solar system. They are still being discovered at a rate of about 5,000 new asteroids per month! The majority are located in between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. This region is called the asteroid belt, as shown in Figure 25.32. There are many thousands of asteroids in the asteroid belt. Still, their total mass adds up to only about 4 percent of Earths Moon. Asteroids formed at the same time as the rest of the solar system. Although there are many in the asteroid belt, they were never were able to form into a planet. Jupiters gravity kept them apart. 	comet orbits are similar in shape to planet orbits	false
Before these small pieces of matter enter Earths atmosphere, they are called meteoroids. Meteoroids are as large as boulders or as small as tiny sand grains. Larger objects are called asteroids; smaller objects are interplanetary dust. Meteoroids sometimes cluster together in long trails. They are the debris left behind by comets. When Earth passes through a comet trail, there is a meteor shower. During a meteor shower, there are many more meteors than normal for a night or two. 	meteoroids are usually larger than asteroids	false
If you look at the sky on a dark night, you may see a meteor, like in Figure 25.33. A meteor forms a streak of light across the sky. People call them shooting stars because thats what they look like. But meteors are not stars at all. The light you see comes from a small piece of matter burning up as it flies through Earths atmosphere. 	comets are commonly called shooting stars	false
Some comets have periods of 200 years or less. They are called short-period comets. Short-period comets are from a region beyond the orbit of Neptune called the Kuiper Belt. Kuiper is pronounced KI-per, rhyming with viper. The Kuiper Belt is home to comets, asteroids, and at least two dwarf planets. Some comets have periods of thousands or even millions of years. Most long-period comets come from a very distant region of the solar system. This region is called the Oort cloud. The Oort cloud is about 50,000100,000 times the distance from the Sun to Earth. Comets carry materials in from the outer solar system. Comets may have brought water into the early Earth. Other substances could also have come from comets. 	the longest period comets come from the kuiper belt	false
Comets are small, icy objects that orbit the Sun. Comets have highly elliptical orbits. Their orbits carry them from close to the Sun to the solar systems outer edges. When a comet gets close to the Sun, its outer layers of ice melt and evaporate. The vaporized gas and dust forms an atmosphere around the comet. This atmosphere is called a coma. Radiation and particles streaming from the Sun push some of this gas and dust into a long tail. A comets tail always points away from the Sun, no matter which way the comet is moving. Why do you think that is? Figure Gases in the coma and tail of a comet reflect light from the Sun. Comets are very hard to see except when they have comas and tails. That is why they appear only when they are near the Sun. They disappear again as they move back to the outer solar system. The time between one visit from a comet and the next is called the comets period. The first comet whose period was known was Halleys Comet. Its period is 75 years. Halleys Comet last traveled through the inner solar system in 1986. The comet will appear again in 2061. Who will look up at it? 	a comet has an atmosphere only when it gets close to the sun	true
Near-Earth asteroids have orbits that cross Earths orbit. This means that they can collide with Earth. There are over 4,500 known near-Earth asteroids. Small asteroids do sometimes collide with Earth. An asteroid about 510 m in diameter hits about once per year. Five hundred to a thousand of the known near-Earth asteroids are much bigger. They are over 1 kilometer in diameter. When large asteroids hit Earth in the past, many organisms died. At times, many species became extinct. Astronomers keep looking for near-Earth asteroids. They hope to predict a possible collision early so they can to try to stop it. 	any object whose orbit crosses earths can collide with earth	true
Comets are small, icy objects that orbit the Sun. Comets have highly elliptical orbits. Their orbits carry them from close to the Sun to the solar systems outer edges. When a comet gets close to the Sun, its outer layers of ice melt and evaporate. The vaporized gas and dust forms an atmosphere around the comet. This atmosphere is called a coma. Radiation and particles streaming from the Sun push some of this gas and dust into a long tail. A comets tail always points away from the Sun, no matter which way the comet is moving. Why do you think that is? Figure Gases in the coma and tail of a comet reflect light from the Sun. Comets are very hard to see except when they have comas and tails. That is why they appear only when they are near the Sun. They disappear again as they move back to the outer solar system. The time between one visit from a comet and the next is called the comets period. The first comet whose period was known was Halleys Comet. Its period is 75 years. Halleys Comet last traveled through the inner solar system in 1986. The comet will appear again in 2061. Who will look up at it? 	halleys comet is it expected to return in 2061	true
Some comets have periods of 200 years or less. They are called short-period comets. Short-period comets are from a region beyond the orbit of Neptune called the Kuiper Belt. Kuiper is pronounced KI-per, rhyming with viper. The Kuiper Belt is home to comets, asteroids, and at least two dwarf planets. Some comets have periods of thousands or even millions of years. Most long-period comets come from a very distant region of the solar system. This region is called the Oort cloud. The Oort cloud is about 50,000100,000 times the distance from the Sun to Earth. Comets carry materials in from the outer solar system. Comets may have brought water into the early Earth. Other substances could also have come from comets. 	scientists think that comets may have brought water to early earth	true
For several decades, Pluto was a planet. But new solar system objects were discovered that were just as planet-like as Pluto. Astronomers figured out that they were like planets except for one thing. These objects had not cleared their orbits of smaller objects. They didnt have enough gravity to do so. Astronomers made a category called dwarf planets. There are five dwarf planets in our solar system: Ceres, Pluto, Makemake, Haumea and Eris. Figure 25.36 shows Ceres. Ceres is a rocky body that orbits the Sun and is not a star. It could be an asteroid or a planet. Before 2006, Ceres was thought to be the largest asteroid. Is it an asteroid? Ceres is in the asteroid belt. But it is by far the largest object in the belt. Ceres has such high gravity that it is spherical. Is it a planet? Ceres only has about 1.3% of the mass of the Earths Moon. Its orbit is full of other smaller bodies. Its gravity was not high enough to clear its orbit. Ceres fails the fourth criterion for being a planet. Ceres is now considered a dwarf planet along with Pluto. 	the dwarf planet ceres was originally considered to be the largest asteroid	true
Eris is the largest known dwarf planet in the solar system. It is 27 percent larger than Pluto (Figure 25.40). Like Pluto and Makemake, Eris is in the Kuiper belt. But Eris is about 3 times farther from the Sun than Pluto. Because of its distance, Eris was not discovered until 2005. Early on, it was thought that Eris might be the tenth planet. Its discovery helped astronomers realize that they needed a new definition of planet. Eris has a small moon, Dysnomia. Its moon orbits Eris once about every 16 days. Astronomers know there may be other dwarf planets far out in the solar system. Look for Quaoar, Varuna and Orcus to be possibly added to the list of dwarf planets in the future. We still have a lot to discover and explore! 	pluto is always farther from the sun than neptune is	false
Before these small pieces of matter enter Earths atmosphere, they are called meteoroids. Meteoroids are as large as boulders or as small as tiny sand grains. Larger objects are called asteroids; smaller objects are interplanetary dust. Meteoroids sometimes cluster together in long trails. They are the debris left behind by comets. When Earth passes through a comet trail, there is a meteor shower. During a meteor shower, there are many more meteors than normal for a night or two. 	event that occurs when earth passes through the tail of a comet	1.g
Before these small pieces of matter enter Earths atmosphere, they are called meteoroids. Meteoroids are as large as boulders or as small as tiny sand grains. Larger objects are called asteroids; smaller objects are interplanetary dust. Meteoroids sometimes cluster together in long trails. They are the debris left behind by comets. When Earth passes through a comet trail, there is a meteor shower. During a meteor shower, there are many more meteors than normal for a night or two. 	atmosphere of a comet	2.f
Asteroids are very small, irregularly shaped, rocky bodies. Asteroids orbit the Sun, but they are more like giant rocks than planets. Since they are small, they do not have enough gravity to become round. They are too small to have an atmosphere. With no internal heat, they are not geologically active. An asteroid can only change due to a collision. A collision may cause the asteroid to break up. It may create craters on the asteroids surface. An asteroid may strike a planet if it comes near enough to be pulled in by its gravity. Figure 25.31 shows a typical asteroid. 	small irregularly shaped rocky body that orbits the sun	3.a
Some comets have periods of 200 years or less. They are called short-period comets. Short-period comets are from a region beyond the orbit of Neptune called the Kuiper Belt. Kuiper is pronounced KI-per, rhyming with viper. The Kuiper Belt is home to comets, asteroids, and at least two dwarf planets. Some comets have periods of thousands or even millions of years. Most long-period comets come from a very distant region of the solar system. This region is called the Oort cloud. The Oort cloud is about 50,000100,000 times the distance from the Sun to Earth. Comets carry materials in from the outer solar system. Comets may have brought water into the early Earth. Other substances could also have come from comets. 	region from which many comets come	4.d
Hundreds of thousands of asteroids have been found in our solar system. They are still being discovered at a rate of about 5,000 new asteroids per month! The majority are located in between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. This region is called the asteroid belt, as shown in Figure 25.32. There are many thousands of asteroids in the asteroid belt. Still, their total mass adds up to only about 4 percent of Earths Moon. Asteroids formed at the same time as the rest of the solar system. Although there are many in the asteroid belt, they were never were able to form into a planet. Jupiters gravity kept them apart. 	region where most asteroids are located	5.b
If you look at the sky on a dark night, you may see a meteor, like in Figure 25.33. A meteor forms a streak of light across the sky. People call them shooting stars because thats what they look like. But meteors are not stars at all. The light you see comes from a small piece of matter burning up as it flies through Earths atmosphere. 	small chunk of space rock that burns up as it falls through earths atmosphere	6.e
For several decades, Pluto was a planet. But new solar system objects were discovered that were just as planet-like as Pluto. Astronomers figured out that they were like planets except for one thing. These objects had not cleared their orbits of smaller objects. They didnt have enough gravity to do so. Astronomers made a category called dwarf planets. There are five dwarf planets in our solar system: Ceres, Pluto, Makemake, Haumea and Eris. Figure 25.36 shows Ceres. Ceres is a rocky body that orbits the Sun and is not a star. It could be an asteroid or a planet. Before 2006, Ceres was thought to be the largest asteroid. Is it an asteroid? Ceres is in the asteroid belt. But it is by far the largest object in the belt. Ceres has such high gravity that it is spherical. Is it a planet? Ceres only has about 1.3% of the mass of the Earths Moon. Its orbit is full of other smaller bodies. Its gravity was not high enough to clear its orbit. Ceres fails the fourth criterion for being a planet. Ceres is now considered a dwarf planet along with Pluto. 	small icy object that orbits the sun	7.c
Stars shine in many different colors. The color relates to a stars temperature and often its size. 	the hottest stars bluewhite the coolest stars are red	true
Stars shine in many different colors. The color relates to a stars temperature and often its size. 	stars in a constellation are near each other in space	false
Only a tiny bit of the Suns light reaches Earth. But that light supplies most of the energy at the surface. The Sun is just an ordinary star, but it appears much bigger and brighter than any of the other stars. Of course, this is just because it is very close. Some other stars produce much more energy than the Sun. How do stars generate so much energy? 	our sun is about half way through its life span	true
After a supernova explosion, the stars core is left over. This material is extremely dense. If the core is less than about four times the mass of the Sun, the star will become a neutron star. A neutron star is shown in Figure 26.4. This type of star is made almost entirely of neutrons. A neutron star has more mass than the Sun, yet it is only a few kilometers in diameter. If the core remaining after a supernova is more than about 5 times the mass of the Sun, the core collapses to become a black hole. Black holes are so dense that not even light can escape their gravity. For that reason, we cant see black holes. How can we know something exists if radiation cant escape it? We know a black hole is there by the effect that it has on objects around it. Also, some radiation leaks out around its edges. A black hole isnt a hole at all. It is the tremendously dense core of a supermassive star. 	a black hole emits dark electromagnetic radiation that we cannot see	false
The stars that make up a constellation appear close to each other from Earth. In reality, they may be very distant from one another. Constellations were important to people, like the Ancient Greeks. People who spent a lot of time outdoors at night, like shepherds, named them and told stories about them. Figure 26.1 shows one of the most easily recognized constellations. The ancient Greeks thought this group of stars looked like a hunter. They named it Orion, after a great hunter in Greek mythology. The constellations stay the same night after night. The patterns of the stars never change. However, each night the constellations move across the sky. They move because Earth is spinning on its axis. The constellations also move with the seasons. This is because Earth revolves around the Sun. Different constellations are up in the winter than in the summer. For example, Orion is high up in the winter sky. In the summer, its only up in the early morning. 	the same constellations appear in a location all yearround	false
The stars that make up a constellation appear close to each other from Earth. In reality, they may be very distant from one another. Constellations were important to people, like the Ancient Greeks. People who spent a lot of time outdoors at night, like shepherds, named them and told stories about them. Figure 26.1 shows one of the most easily recognized constellations. The ancient Greeks thought this group of stars looked like a hunter. They named it Orion, after a great hunter in Greek mythology. The constellations stay the same night after night. The patterns of the stars never change. However, each night the constellations move across the sky. They move because Earth is spinning on its axis. The constellations also move with the seasons. This is because Earth revolves around the Sun. Different constellations are up in the winter than in the summer. For example, Orion is high up in the winter sky. In the summer, its only up in the early morning. 	constellations appear from earth to move with the seasons	true
Only a tiny bit of the Suns light reaches Earth. But that light supplies most of the energy at the surface. The Sun is just an ordinary star, but it appears much bigger and brighter than any of the other stars. Of course, this is just because it is very close. Some other stars produce much more energy than the Sun. How do stars generate so much energy? 	our sun is the biggest and brightest star in the galaxy	false
Stars shine in many different colors. The color relates to a stars temperature and often its size. 	stars are made mostly of hydrogen and helium	true
Stars shine in many different colors. The color relates to a stars temperature and often its size. 	the coolest stars are red in color	true
Our solar system has only one star. But many stars are in systems of two or more stars. Two stars that orbit each other are called a binary star system. If more than two stars orbit each other, it is called a multiple star system. Figure 26.5 shows two binary star systems orbiting each other. This creates an unusual quadruple star system. 	once a star forms it never changes	false
Stars are born in clouds of gas and dust called nebulas. Our Sun and solar system formed out of a nebula. A nebula is shown in Figure 26.2. In Figure 26.1, the fuzzy area beneath the central three stars contains the Orion nebula. For a star to form, gravity pulls gas and dust into the center of the nebula. As the material becomes denser, the pressure and the temperature increase. When the temperature of the center becomes hot enough, nuclear fusion begins. The ball of gas has become a star! 	gravity causes a nebula to become denser at the center	true
For most of a stars life, hydrogen atoms fuse to form helium atoms. A star like this is a main sequence star. The hotter a main sequence star is, the brighter it is. A star remains on the main sequence as long as it is fusing hydrogen to form helium. Our Sun has been a main sequence star for about 5 billion years. As a medium-sized star, it will continue to shine for about 5 billion more years. Large stars burn through their supply of hydrogen very quickly. These stars live fast and die young! A very large star may only be on the main sequence for 10 million years. A very small star may be on the main sequence for tens to hundreds of billions of years. 	a larger star remains on the main sequence longer than a smaller star	false
A star like our Sun will become a red giant in its next stage. When a star uses up its hydrogen, it begins to fuse helium atoms. Helium fuses into heavier atoms like carbon. At this time the stars core starts to collapse inward. The stars outer layers spread out and cool. The result is a larger star that is cooler on the surface, and red in color. Eventually a red giant burns up all of the helium in its core. What happens next depends on the stars mass. A star like the Sun stops fusion and shrinks into a white dwarf star. A white dwarf is a hot, white, glowing object about the size of Earth. Eventually, a white dwarf cools down and its light fades out. 	the next stage our sun will go through is white dwarf	false
A more massive star ends its life in a more dramatic way. Very massive stars become red supergiants, like Betelgeuse. In a red supergiant, fusion does not stop. Lighter atoms fuse into heavier atoms. Eventually iron atoms form. When there is nothing left to fuse, the stars iron core explodes violently. This is called a supernova explosion. The incredible energy released fuses heavy atoms together. Gold, silver, uranium and the other heavy elements can only form in a supernova explosion. A supernova can shine as brightly as an entire galaxy, but only for a short time, as shown in Figure 26.3. 	betelgeuse is an example of a red supergiant	true
Astronomers use light years as the unit to describe distances in space. Remember that a light year is the distance light travels in one year. How do astronomers measure the distance to stars? For stars that are close to us, they measure shifts in their position over time. This is called parallax. For distant stars, they use the stars brightness. For example, if a star is like the Sun, it should be about as bright as the Sun. They then figure out the stars distance from Earth by measuring how much less bright it is than expected. 	a black hole is an empty place in space	false
Stars are born in clouds of gas and dust called nebulas. Our Sun and solar system formed out of a nebula. A nebula is shown in Figure 26.2. In Figure 26.1, the fuzzy area beneath the central three stars contains the Orion nebula. For a star to form, gravity pulls gas and dust into the center of the nebula. As the material becomes denser, the pressure and the temperature increase. When the temperature of the center becomes hot enough, nuclear fusion begins. The ball of gas has become a star! 	giant ball of glowing gas that is very hot	1. g
For most of a stars life, hydrogen atoms fuse to form helium atoms. A star like this is a main sequence star. The hotter a main sequence star is, the brighter it is. A star remains on the main sequence as long as it is fusing hydrogen to form helium. Our Sun has been a main sequence star for about 5 billion years. As a medium-sized star, it will continue to shine for about 5 billion more years. Large stars burn through their supply of hydrogen very quickly. These stars live fast and die young! A very large star may only be on the main sequence for 10 million years. A very small star may be on the main sequence for tens to hundreds of billions of years. 	stage of a stars life in which hydrogen atoms fuse to form helium	2. c
For most of a stars life, hydrogen atoms fuse to form helium atoms. A star like this is a main sequence star. The hotter a main sequence star is, the brighter it is. A star remains on the main sequence as long as it is fusing hydrogen to form helium. Our Sun has been a main sequence star for about 5 billion years. As a medium-sized star, it will continue to shine for about 5 billion more years. Large stars burn through their supply of hydrogen very quickly. These stars live fast and die young! A very large star may only be on the main sequence for 10 million years. A very small star may be on the main sequence for tens to hundreds of billions of years. 	stage of a stars life in which helium atoms fuse to form heavier elements	3. e
A more massive star ends its life in a more dramatic way. Very massive stars become red supergiants, like Betelgeuse. In a red supergiant, fusion does not stop. Lighter atoms fuse into heavier atoms. Eventually iron atoms form. When there is nothing left to fuse, the stars iron core explodes violently. This is called a supernova explosion. The incredible energy released fuses heavy atoms together. Gold, silver, uranium and the other heavy elements can only form in a supernova explosion. A supernova can shine as brightly as an entire galaxy, but only for a short time, as shown in Figure 26.3. 	explosion of a red supergiant star	4.f
After a supernova explosion, the stars core is left over. This material is extremely dense. If the core is less than about four times the mass of the Sun, the star will become a neutron star. A neutron star is shown in Figure 26.4. This type of star is made almost entirely of neutrons. A neutron star has more mass than the Sun, yet it is only a few kilometers in diameter. If the core remaining after a supernova is more than about 5 times the mass of the Sun, the core collapses to become a black hole. Black holes are so dense that not even light can escape their gravity. For that reason, we cant see black holes. How can we know something exists if radiation cant escape it? We know a black hole is there by the effect that it has on objects around it. Also, some radiation leaks out around its edges. A black hole isnt a hole at all. It is the tremendously dense core of a supermassive star. 	core of a star that has too much gravity to let light escape	5.b
Stars are born in clouds of gas and dust called nebulas. Our Sun and solar system formed out of a nebula. A nebula is shown in Figure 26.2. In Figure 26.1, the fuzzy area beneath the central three stars contains the Orion nebula. For a star to form, gravity pulls gas and dust into the center of the nebula. As the material becomes denser, the pressure and the temperature increase. When the temperature of the center becomes hot enough, nuclear fusion begins. The ball of gas has become a star! 	cloud of gas and dust from which a star forms	6.d
Our solar system has only one star. But many stars are in systems of two or more stars. Two stars that orbit each other are called a binary star system. If more than two stars orbit each other, it is called a multiple star system. Figure 26.5 shows two binary star systems orbiting each other. This creates an unusual quadruple star system. 	two stars that orbit each other	7.a
Galaxies are divided into three types, according to shape. There are spiral galaxies, elliptical galaxies, and irregular galaxies. Spiral galaxies are a rotating disk of stars and dust. In the center is a dense bulge of material. Several arms spiral out from the center. Spiral galaxies have lots of gas and dust and many young stars. Figure 26.9 shows a spiral galaxy from the side. You can see the disk and central bulge. 	type of galaxy that is a rotating disk of stars and dust	1.e
Star clusters are groups of stars smaller than a galaxy. There are two main types, open clusters and globular clusters. Open clusters are groups of up to a few thousand stars held together by gravity. The Jewel Box, shown in Figure an open cluster are young stars that all formed from the same nebula. Globular clusters are groups of tens to hundreds of thousands of stars held tightly together by gravity. Globular clusters have a definite, spherical shape. They contain mostly old, reddish stars. Near the center of a globular cluster, the stars are closer together. Figure 26.7 shows a globular cluster. The heart of the globular cluster M13 has hundreds of thousands of stars. M13 is 145 light years in diameter. The cluster contains red and blue giant stars. 	star cluster containing up to a few thousand stars	2.d
Figure 26.10 shows a typical elliptical galaxy. Elliptical galaxies are oval in shape. The smallest are called dwarf elliptical galaxies. Look back at the image of the Andromeda Galaxy. It has two dwarf elliptical galaxies as its companions. Dwarf galaxies are often found near larger galaxies. They sometimes collide with and merge into their larger neighbors. Giant elliptical galaxies contain over a trillion stars. Elliptical galaxies are red to yellow in color because they contain mostly old stars. Most contain very little gas and dust because the material has already formed into stars. 	type of galaxy that is oval in shape	3.a
If you get away from city lights and look up in the sky on a very clear night, you will see something spectacular. A band of milky light stretches across the sky, as in Figure 26.12. This band is the disk of the Milky Way Galaxy. This is the galaxy where we all live. The Milky Way Galaxy looks different to us than other galaxies because our view is from inside of it! 	the milky way appears as a band of light across the night sky	true
The biggest groups of stars are called galaxies. A few million to many billions of stars may make up a galaxy. With the unaided eye, every star you can see is part of the Milky Way Galaxy. All the other galaxies are extremely far away. The closest spiral galaxy, the Andromeda Galaxy, shown in Figure 26.8, is 2,500,000 light years away and contains one trillion stars! 	group of stars that is smaller than a galaxy	4.f
Look at the galaxy in Figure 26.11. Do you think this is a spiral galaxy or an elliptical galaxy? It doesnt look like either! If a galaxy is not spiral or elliptical, it is an irregular galaxy. Most irregular galaxies have been deformed. This can occur either by the pull of a larger galaxy or by a collision with another galaxy. 	most of the galaxies we see from earth are dwarf galaxies	false
Star clusters are groups of stars smaller than a galaxy. There are two main types, open clusters and globular clusters. Open clusters are groups of up to a few thousand stars held together by gravity. The Jewel Box, shown in Figure an open cluster are young stars that all formed from the same nebula. Globular clusters are groups of tens to hundreds of thousands of stars held tightly together by gravity. Globular clusters have a definite, spherical shape. They contain mostly old, reddish stars. Near the center of a globular cluster, the stars are closer together. Figure 26.7 shows a globular cluster. The heart of the globular cluster M13 has hundreds of thousands of stars. M13 is 145 light years in diameter. The cluster contains red and blue giant stars. 	very large group of stars that are held together by gravity	5.g
Star clusters are groups of stars smaller than a galaxy. There are two main types, open clusters and globular clusters. Open clusters are groups of up to a few thousand stars held together by gravity. The Jewel Box, shown in Figure an open cluster are young stars that all formed from the same nebula. Globular clusters are groups of tens to hundreds of thousands of stars held tightly together by gravity. Globular clusters have a definite, spherical shape. They contain mostly old, reddish stars. Near the center of a globular cluster, the stars are closer together. Figure 26.7 shows a globular cluster. The heart of the globular cluster M13 has hundreds of thousands of stars. M13 is 145 light years in diameter. The cluster contains red and blue giant stars. 	star cluster containing up to tens of thousands of stars	6.b
Look at the galaxy in Figure 26.11. Do you think this is a spiral galaxy or an elliptical galaxy? It doesnt look like either! If a galaxy is not spiral or elliptical, it is an irregular galaxy. Most irregular galaxies have been deformed. This can occur either by the pull of a larger galaxy or by a collision with another galaxy. 	elliptical galaxies have mostly younger blue stars	false
Look at the galaxy in Figure 26.11. Do you think this is a spiral galaxy or an elliptical galaxy? It doesnt look like either! If a galaxy is not spiral or elliptical, it is an irregular galaxy. Most irregular galaxies have been deformed. This can occur either by the pull of a larger galaxy or by a collision with another galaxy. 	type of galaxy that is neither spiral nor elliptical in shape	7.c
The biggest groups of stars are called galaxies. A few million to many billions of stars may make up a galaxy. With the unaided eye, every star you can see is part of the Milky Way Galaxy. All the other galaxies are extremely far away. The closest spiral galaxy, the Andromeda Galaxy, shown in Figure 26.8, is 2,500,000 light years away and contains one trillion stars! 	every star that you see without a telescope is in the milky way galaxy	true
Look at the galaxy in Figure 26.11. Do you think this is a spiral galaxy or an elliptical galaxy? It doesnt look like either! If a galaxy is not spiral or elliptical, it is an irregular galaxy. Most irregular galaxies have been deformed. This can occur either by the pull of a larger galaxy or by a collision with another galaxy. 	our solar system is slowly spinning around our galaxy	true
The biggest groups of stars are called galaxies. A few million to many billions of stars may make up a galaxy. With the unaided eye, every star you can see is part of the Milky Way Galaxy. All the other galaxies are extremely far away. The closest spiral galaxy, the Andromeda Galaxy, shown in Figure 26.8, is 2,500,000 light years away and contains one trillion stars! 	there are billions of galaxies in the universe	true
The biggest groups of stars are called galaxies. A few million to many billions of stars may make up a galaxy. With the unaided eye, every star you can see is part of the Milky Way Galaxy. All the other galaxies are extremely far away. The closest spiral galaxy, the Andromeda Galaxy, shown in Figure 26.8, is 2,500,000 light years away and contains one trillion stars! 	a star cluster may contain one or more galaxies	false
Star clusters are groups of stars smaller than a galaxy. There are two main types, open clusters and globular clusters. Open clusters are groups of up to a few thousand stars held together by gravity. The Jewel Box, shown in Figure an open cluster are young stars that all formed from the same nebula. Globular clusters are groups of tens to hundreds of thousands of stars held tightly together by gravity. Globular clusters have a definite, spherical shape. They contain mostly old, reddish stars. Near the center of a globular cluster, the stars are closer together. Figure 26.7 shows a globular cluster. The heart of the globular cluster M13 has hundreds of thousands of stars. M13 is 145 light years in diameter. The cluster contains red and blue giant stars. 	open star clusters contain more stars than globular star clusters	false
Galaxies are divided into three types, according to shape. There are spiral galaxies, elliptical galaxies, and irregular galaxies. Spiral galaxies are a rotating disk of stars and dust. In the center is a dense bulge of material. Several arms spiral out from the center. Spiral galaxies have lots of gas and dust and many young stars. Figure 26.9 shows a spiral galaxy from the side. You can see the disk and central bulge. 	galaxies are divided into types based on size	false
Look at the galaxy in Figure 26.11. Do you think this is a spiral galaxy or an elliptical galaxy? It doesnt look like either! If a galaxy is not spiral or elliptical, it is an irregular galaxy. Most irregular galaxies have been deformed. This can occur either by the pull of a larger galaxy or by a collision with another galaxy. 	spiral galaxies are generally older than elliptical galaxies	false
Look at the galaxy in Figure 26.11. Do you think this is a spiral galaxy or an elliptical galaxy? It doesnt look like either! If a galaxy is not spiral or elliptical, it is an irregular galaxy. Most irregular galaxies have been deformed. This can occur either by the pull of a larger galaxy or by a collision with another galaxy. 	dwarf galaxies are often found near larger galaxies	true
The biggest groups of stars are called galaxies. A few million to many billions of stars may make up a galaxy. With the unaided eye, every star you can see is part of the Milky Way Galaxy. All the other galaxies are extremely far away. The closest spiral galaxy, the Andromeda Galaxy, shown in Figure 26.8, is 2,500,000 light years away and contains one trillion stars! 	some galaxies contain over a trillion stars	true
Look at the galaxy in Figure 26.11. Do you think this is a spiral galaxy or an elliptical galaxy? It doesnt look like either! If a galaxy is not spiral or elliptical, it is an irregular galaxy. Most irregular galaxies have been deformed. This can occur either by the pull of a larger galaxy or by a collision with another galaxy. 	our solar system is within one of the spiral arms of our galaxy	true
Galaxies are divided into three types, according to shape. There are spiral galaxies, elliptical galaxies, and irregular galaxies. Spiral galaxies are a rotating disk of stars and dust. In the center is a dense bulge of material. Several arms spiral out from the center. Spiral galaxies have lots of gas and dust and many young stars. Figure 26.9 shows a spiral galaxy from the side. You can see the disk and central bulge. 	our solar system orbits the central disk of our galaxy	true
Look at the galaxy in Figure 26.11. Do you think this is a spiral galaxy or an elliptical galaxy? It doesnt look like either! If a galaxy is not spiral or elliptical, it is an irregular galaxy. Most irregular galaxies have been deformed. This can occur either by the pull of a larger galaxy or by a collision with another galaxy. 	from earth our galaxy looks like a giant spiral	false
All rocks on Earth change, but these changes usually happen very slowly. Some changes happen below Earths surface. Some changes happen above ground. These changes are all part of the rock cycle. The rock cycle describes each of the main types of rocks, how they form and how they change. Figure 4.1 shows how the three main rock types are related to each other. The arrows within the circle show how one type of rock may change to rock of another type. For example, igneous rock may break down into small pieces of sediment and become sedimentary rock. Igneous rock may be buried within the Earth and become metamorphic rock. Igneous rock may also change back to molten material and re-cool into a new igneous rock. Rocks are made of minerals. The minerals may be so tiny that you can only see them with a microscope. The minerals may be really large. A rock may be made of only one type of mineral. More often rocks are made of a mixture of different minerals. Rocks are named for the combinations of minerals they are made of and the ways those minerals came together. Remember that different minerals form under different environmental conditions. So the minerals in a rock contain clues about the conditions in which the rock formed (Figure 4.2). 	particle of rock or mineral	1.d
Geologists group rocks based on how they were formed. The three main kinds of rocks are: 1. Igneous rocks form when magma cools below Earths surface or lava cools at the surface (Figure 4.3). 2. Sedimentary rocks form when sediments are compacted and cemented together (Figure 4.4). These sediments may be gravel, sand, silt or clay. Sedimentary rocks often have pieces of other rocks in them. Some sedimentary rocks form the solid minerals left behind after a liquid evaporates. 3. Metamorphic rocks form when an existing rock is changed by heat or pressure. The minerals in the rock change but do not melt (Figure 4.5). The rock experiences these changes within the Earth. Rocks can be changed from one type to another, and the rock cycle describes how this happens. 	any mixture of minerals in the solid state	2.c
Geologists group rocks based on how they were formed. The three main kinds of rocks are: 1. Igneous rocks form when magma cools below Earths surface or lava cools at the surface (Figure 4.3). 2. Sedimentary rocks form when sediments are compacted and cemented together (Figure 4.4). These sediments may be gravel, sand, silt or clay. Sedimentary rocks often have pieces of other rocks in them. Some sedimentary rocks form the solid minerals left behind after a liquid evaporates. 3. Metamorphic rocks form when an existing rock is changed by heat or pressure. The minerals in the rock change but do not melt (Figure 4.5). The rock experiences these changes within the Earth. Rocks can be changed from one type to another, and the rock cycle describes how this happens. 	type of rock that forms when sediments are compacted and cemented together	3.g
Geologists group rocks based on how they were formed. The three main kinds of rocks are: 1. Igneous rocks form when magma cools below Earths surface or lava cools at the surface (Figure 4.3). 2. Sedimentary rocks form when sediments are compacted and cemented together (Figure 4.4). These sediments may be gravel, sand, silt or clay. Sedimentary rocks often have pieces of other rocks in them. Some sedimentary rocks form the solid minerals left behind after a liquid evaporates. 3. Metamorphic rocks form when an existing rock is changed by heat or pressure. The minerals in the rock change but do not melt (Figure 4.5). The rock experiences these changes within the Earth. Rocks can be changed from one type to another, and the rock cycle describes how this happens. 	type of rock that forms when existing rock is subjected to high heat and pressure	4.b
Geologists group rocks based on how they were formed. The three main kinds of rocks are: 1. Igneous rocks form when magma cools below Earths surface or lava cools at the surface (Figure 4.3). 2. Sedimentary rocks form when sediments are compacted and cemented together (Figure 4.4). These sediments may be gravel, sand, silt or clay. Sedimentary rocks often have pieces of other rocks in them. Some sedimentary rocks form the solid minerals left behind after a liquid evaporates. 3. Metamorphic rocks form when an existing rock is changed by heat or pressure. The minerals in the rock change but do not melt (Figure 4.5). The rock experiences these changes within the Earth. Rocks can be changed from one type to another, and the rock cycle describes how this happens. 	type of rock that forms when magma or lava cools	5.e
Geologists group rocks based on how they were formed. The three main kinds of rocks are: 1. Igneous rocks form when magma cools below Earths surface or lava cools at the surface (Figure 4.3). 2. Sedimentary rocks form when sediments are compacted and cemented together (Figure 4.4). These sediments may be gravel, sand, silt or clay. Sedimentary rocks often have pieces of other rocks in them. Some sedimentary rocks form the solid minerals left behind after a liquid evaporates. 3. Metamorphic rocks form when an existing rock is changed by heat or pressure. The minerals in the rock change but do not melt (Figure 4.5). The rock experiences these changes within the Earth. Rocks can be changed from one type to another, and the rock cycle describes how this happens. 	continuous series of processes by which rocks change from one type to another	6.a
Geologists group rocks based on how they were formed. The three main kinds of rocks are: 1. Igneous rocks form when magma cools below Earths surface or lava cools at the surface (Figure 4.3). 2. Sedimentary rocks form when sediments are compacted and cemented together (Figure 4.4). These sediments may be gravel, sand, silt or clay. Sedimentary rocks often have pieces of other rocks in them. Some sedimentary rocks form the solid minerals left behind after a liquid evaporates. 3. Metamorphic rocks form when an existing rock is changed by heat or pressure. The minerals in the rock change but do not melt (Figure 4.5). The rock experiences these changes within the Earth. Rocks can be changed from one type to another, and the rock cycle describes how this happens. 	process in which a rock changes to a different type of rock due to extreme heat and pressure	7.f
Geologists group rocks based on how they were formed. The three main kinds of rocks are: 1. Igneous rocks form when magma cools below Earths surface or lava cools at the surface (Figure 4.3). 2. Sedimentary rocks form when sediments are compacted and cemented together (Figure 4.4). These sediments may be gravel, sand, silt or clay. Sedimentary rocks often have pieces of other rocks in them. Some sedimentary rocks form the solid minerals left behind after a liquid evaporates. 3. Metamorphic rocks form when an existing rock is changed by heat or pressure. The minerals in the rock change but do not melt (Figure 4.5). The rock experiences these changes within the Earth. Rocks can be changed from one type to another, and the rock cycle describes how this happens. 	as magma cools all of the mineral grains form at the same temperature	false
Any type of rock can change and become a new type of rock. Magma can cool and crystallize. Existing rocks can be weathered and eroded to form sediments. Rock can change by heat or pressure deep in Earths crust. There are three main processes that can change rock: Cooling and forming crystals. Deep within the Earth, temperatures can get hot enough to melt rock. This molten material is called magma. As it cools, crystals grow, forming an igneous rock. The crystals will grow larger if the magma cools slowly, as it does if it remains deep within the Earth. If the magma cools quickly, the crystals will be very small. Weathering and erosion. Water, wind, ice, and even plants and animals all act to wear down rocks. Over time they can break larger rocks into smaller pieces called sediments. Moving water, wind, and glaciers then carry these pieces from one place to another. The sediments are eventually dropped, or deposited, somewhere. The sediments may then be compacted and cemented together. This forms a sedimentary rock. This whole process can take hundreds or thousands of years. Metamorphism. This long word means to change form. A rock undergoes metamorphism if it is exposed to extreme heat and pressure within the crust. With metamorphism, the rock does not melt all the way. The rock changes due to heat and pressure. A metamorphic rock may have a new mineral composition and/or texture. An interactive rock cycle diagram can be found here:  The rock cycle really has no beginning or end. It just continues. The processes involved in the rock cycle take place over hundreds, thousands, or even millions of years. Even though for us rocks are solid and unchanging, they slowly change all the time. 	metamorphism may change the chemical composition of a rock	false
All rocks on Earth change, but these changes usually happen very slowly. Some changes happen below Earths surface. Some changes happen above ground. These changes are all part of the rock cycle. The rock cycle describes each of the main types of rocks, how they form and how they change. Figure 4.1 shows how the three main rock types are related to each other. The arrows within the circle show how one type of rock may change to rock of another type. For example, igneous rock may break down into small pieces of sediment and become sedimentary rock. Igneous rock may be buried within the Earth and become metamorphic rock. Igneous rock may also change back to molten material and re-cool into a new igneous rock. Rocks are made of minerals. The minerals may be so tiny that you can only see them with a microscope. The minerals may be really large. A rock may be made of only one type of mineral. More often rocks are made of a mixture of different minerals. Rocks are named for the combinations of minerals they are made of and the ways those minerals came together. Remember that different minerals form under different environmental conditions. So the minerals in a rock contain clues about the conditions in which the rock formed (Figure 4.2). 	only one type of mineral can be present in a metamorphic rock	false
All rocks on Earth change, but these changes usually happen very slowly. Some changes happen below Earths surface. Some changes happen above ground. These changes are all part of the rock cycle. The rock cycle describes each of the main types of rocks, how they form and how they change. Figure 4.1 shows how the three main rock types are related to each other. The arrows within the circle show how one type of rock may change to rock of another type. For example, igneous rock may break down into small pieces of sediment and become sedimentary rock. Igneous rock may be buried within the Earth and become metamorphic rock. Igneous rock may also change back to molten material and re-cool into a new igneous rock. Rocks are made of minerals. The minerals may be so tiny that you can only see them with a microscope. The minerals may be really large. A rock may be made of only one type of mineral. More often rocks are made of a mixture of different minerals. Rocks are named for the combinations of minerals they are made of and the ways those minerals came together. Remember that different minerals form under different environmental conditions. So the minerals in a rock contain clues about the conditions in which the rock formed (Figure 4.2). 	rocks can be studied through a microscope	true
All rocks on Earth change, but these changes usually happen very slowly. Some changes happen below Earths surface. Some changes happen above ground. These changes are all part of the rock cycle. The rock cycle describes each of the main types of rocks, how they form and how they change. Figure 4.1 shows how the three main rock types are related to each other. The arrows within the circle show how one type of rock may change to rock of another type. For example, igneous rock may break down into small pieces of sediment and become sedimentary rock. Igneous rock may be buried within the Earth and become metamorphic rock. Igneous rock may also change back to molten material and re-cool into a new igneous rock. Rocks are made of minerals. The minerals may be so tiny that you can only see them with a microscope. The minerals may be really large. A rock may be made of only one type of mineral. More often rocks are made of a mixture of different minerals. Rocks are named for the combinations of minerals they are made of and the ways those minerals came together. Remember that different minerals form under different environmental conditions. So the minerals in a rock contain clues about the conditions in which the rock formed (Figure 4.2). 	a metamorphic rock must have a different mineral composition than its parent rock	false
Geologists group rocks based on how they were formed. The three main kinds of rocks are: 1. Igneous rocks form when magma cools below Earths surface or lava cools at the surface (Figure 4.3). 2. Sedimentary rocks form when sediments are compacted and cemented together (Figure 4.4). These sediments may be gravel, sand, silt or clay. Sedimentary rocks often have pieces of other rocks in them. Some sedimentary rocks form the solid minerals left behind after a liquid evaporates. 3. Metamorphic rocks form when an existing rock is changed by heat or pressure. The minerals in the rock change but do not melt (Figure 4.5). The rock experiences these changes within the Earth. Rocks can be changed from one type to another, and the rock cycle describes how this happens. 	when a rock changes from one type to another it usually happens very quickly	false
Geologists group rocks based on how they were formed. The three main kinds of rocks are: 1. Igneous rocks form when magma cools below Earths surface or lava cools at the surface (Figure 4.3). 2. Sedimentary rocks form when sediments are compacted and cemented together (Figure 4.4). These sediments may be gravel, sand, silt or clay. Sedimentary rocks often have pieces of other rocks in them. Some sedimentary rocks form the solid minerals left behind after a liquid evaporates. 3. Metamorphic rocks form when an existing rock is changed by heat or pressure. The minerals in the rock change but do not melt (Figure 4.5). The rock experiences these changes within the Earth. Rocks can be changed from one type to another, and the rock cycle describes how this happens. 	one type of rock can change to any other type of rock	true
Geologists group rocks based on how they were formed. The three main kinds of rocks are: 1. Igneous rocks form when magma cools below Earths surface or lava cools at the surface (Figure 4.3). 2. Sedimentary rocks form when sediments are compacted and cemented together (Figure 4.4). These sediments may be gravel, sand, silt or clay. Sedimentary rocks often have pieces of other rocks in them. Some sedimentary rocks form the solid minerals left behind after a liquid evaporates. 3. Metamorphic rocks form when an existing rock is changed by heat or pressure. The minerals in the rock change but do not melt (Figure 4.5). The rock experiences these changes within the Earth. Rocks can be changed from one type to another, and the rock cycle describes how this happens. 	all the processes of the rock cycle take place underground	false
All rocks on Earth change, but these changes usually happen very slowly. Some changes happen below Earths surface. Some changes happen above ground. These changes are all part of the rock cycle. The rock cycle describes each of the main types of rocks, how they form and how they change. Figure 4.1 shows how the three main rock types are related to each other. The arrows within the circle show how one type of rock may change to rock of another type. For example, igneous rock may break down into small pieces of sediment and become sedimentary rock. Igneous rock may be buried within the Earth and become metamorphic rock. Igneous rock may also change back to molten material and re-cool into a new igneous rock. Rocks are made of minerals. The minerals may be so tiny that you can only see them with a microscope. The minerals may be really large. A rock may be made of only one type of mineral. More often rocks are made of a mixture of different minerals. Rocks are named for the combinations of minerals they are made of and the ways those minerals came together. Remember that different minerals form under different environmental conditions. So the minerals in a rock contain clues about the conditions in which the rock formed (Figure 4.2). 	to see the minerals in rock you always need to use a microscope	false
All rocks on Earth change, but these changes usually happen very slowly. Some changes happen below Earths surface. Some changes happen above ground. These changes are all part of the rock cycle. The rock cycle describes each of the main types of rocks, how they form and how they change. Figure 4.1 shows how the three main rock types are related to each other. The arrows within the circle show how one type of rock may change to rock of another type. For example, igneous rock may break down into small pieces of sediment and become sedimentary rock. Igneous rock may be buried within the Earth and become metamorphic rock. Igneous rock may also change back to molten material and re-cool into a new igneous rock. Rocks are made of minerals. The minerals may be so tiny that you can only see them with a microscope. The minerals may be really large. A rock may be made of only one type of mineral. More often rocks are made of a mixture of different minerals. Rocks are named for the combinations of minerals they are made of and the ways those minerals came together. Remember that different minerals form under different environmental conditions. So the minerals in a rock contain clues about the conditions in which the rock formed (Figure 4.2). 	rocks are named for the minerals they contain and how the minerals came together	true
Geologists group rocks based on how they were formed. The three main kinds of rocks are: 1. Igneous rocks form when magma cools below Earths surface or lava cools at the surface (Figure 4.3). 2. Sedimentary rocks form when sediments are compacted and cemented together (Figure 4.4). These sediments may be gravel, sand, silt or clay. Sedimentary rocks often have pieces of other rocks in them. Some sedimentary rocks form the solid minerals left behind after a liquid evaporates. 3. Metamorphic rocks form when an existing rock is changed by heat or pressure. The minerals in the rock change but do not melt (Figure 4.5). The rock experiences these changes within the Earth. Rocks can be changed from one type to another, and the rock cycle describes how this happens. 	a rock formed from pieces of gravel and sand would be classified as an igneous rock	false
All rocks on Earth change, but these changes usually happen very slowly. Some changes happen below Earths surface. Some changes happen above ground. These changes are all part of the rock cycle. The rock cycle describes each of the main types of rocks, how they form and how they change. Figure 4.1 shows how the three main rock types are related to each other. The arrows within the circle show how one type of rock may change to rock of another type. For example, igneous rock may break down into small pieces of sediment and become sedimentary rock. Igneous rock may be buried within the Earth and become metamorphic rock. Igneous rock may also change back to molten material and re-cool into a new igneous rock. Rocks are made of minerals. The minerals may be so tiny that you can only see them with a microscope. The minerals may be really large. A rock may be made of only one type of mineral. More often rocks are made of a mixture of different minerals. Rocks are named for the combinations of minerals they are made of and the ways those minerals came together. Remember that different minerals form under different environmental conditions. So the minerals in a rock contain clues about the conditions in which the rock formed (Figure 4.2). 	a rock resulting from the formation of mineral crystals would be classified as a sedimentary rock	false
Geologists group rocks based on how they were formed. The three main kinds of rocks are: 1. Igneous rocks form when magma cools below Earths surface or lava cools at the surface (Figure 4.3). 2. Sedimentary rocks form when sediments are compacted and cemented together (Figure 4.4). These sediments may be gravel, sand, silt or clay. Sedimentary rocks often have pieces of other rocks in them. Some sedimentary rocks form the solid minerals left behind after a liquid evaporates. 3. Metamorphic rocks form when an existing rock is changed by heat or pressure. The minerals in the rock change but do not melt (Figure 4.5). The rock experiences these changes within the Earth. Rocks can be changed from one type to another, and the rock cycle describes how this happens. 	sedimentary rocks include sandstone and shale	true
Any type of rock can change and become a new type of rock. Magma can cool and crystallize. Existing rocks can be weathered and eroded to form sediments. Rock can change by heat or pressure deep in Earths crust. There are three main processes that can change rock: Cooling and forming crystals. Deep within the Earth, temperatures can get hot enough to melt rock. This molten material is called magma. As it cools, crystals grow, forming an igneous rock. The crystals will grow larger if the magma cools slowly, as it does if it remains deep within the Earth. If the magma cools quickly, the crystals will be very small. Weathering and erosion. Water, wind, ice, and even plants and animals all act to wear down rocks. Over time they can break larger rocks into smaller pieces called sediments. Moving water, wind, and glaciers then carry these pieces from one place to another. The sediments are eventually dropped, or deposited, somewhere. The sediments may then be compacted and cemented together. This forms a sedimentary rock. This whole process can take hundreds or thousands of years. Metamorphism. This long word means to change form. A rock undergoes metamorphism if it is exposed to extreme heat and pressure within the crust. With metamorphism, the rock does not melt all the way. The rock changes due to heat and pressure. A metamorphic rock may have a new mineral composition and/or texture. An interactive rock cycle diagram can be found here:  The rock cycle really has no beginning or end. It just continues. The processes involved in the rock cycle take place over hundreds, thousands, or even millions of years. Even though for us rocks are solid and unchanging, they slowly change all the time. 	plants and animals can act to wear down rocks	true
Any type of rock can change and become a new type of rock. Magma can cool and crystallize. Existing rocks can be weathered and eroded to form sediments. Rock can change by heat or pressure deep in Earths crust. There are three main processes that can change rock: Cooling and forming crystals. Deep within the Earth, temperatures can get hot enough to melt rock. This molten material is called magma. As it cools, crystals grow, forming an igneous rock. The crystals will grow larger if the magma cools slowly, as it does if it remains deep within the Earth. If the magma cools quickly, the crystals will be very small. Weathering and erosion. Water, wind, ice, and even plants and animals all act to wear down rocks. Over time they can break larger rocks into smaller pieces called sediments. Moving water, wind, and glaciers then carry these pieces from one place to another. The sediments are eventually dropped, or deposited, somewhere. The sediments may then be compacted and cemented together. This forms a sedimentary rock. This whole process can take hundreds or thousands of years. Metamorphism. This long word means to change form. A rock undergoes metamorphism if it is exposed to extreme heat and pressure within the crust. With metamorphism, the rock does not melt all the way. The rock changes due to heat and pressure. A metamorphic rock may have a new mineral composition and/or texture. An interactive rock cycle diagram can be found here:  The rock cycle really has no beginning or end. It just continues. The processes involved in the rock cycle take place over hundreds, thousands, or even millions of years. Even though for us rocks are solid and unchanging, they slowly change all the time. 	metamorphism may change a rocks mineral composition	true
Igneous rocks form when magma cools and forms crystals. These rocks can form at Earths surface or deep underground. Figure 4.7 shows a landscape in Californias Sierra Nevada that consists entirely of granite. Intrusive igneous rocks cool and form into crystals beneath the surface. Deep in the Earth, magma cools slowly. Slow cooling gives large crystals a chance to form. Intrusive igneous rocks have relatively large crystals that are easy to see. Granite is the most common intrusive igneous rock. Figure 4.8 shows four types of intrusive rocks. Extrusive igneous rocks form above the surface. The lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure 	the layer of earth called the mantle is made entirely of igneous rock	true
Igneous rocks form when magma cools and forms crystals. These rocks can form at Earths surface or deep underground. Figure 4.7 shows a landscape in Californias Sierra Nevada that consists entirely of granite. Intrusive igneous rocks cool and form into crystals beneath the surface. Deep in the Earth, magma cools slowly. Slow cooling gives large crystals a chance to form. Intrusive igneous rocks have relatively large crystals that are easy to see. Granite is the most common intrusive igneous rock. Figure 4.8 shows four types of intrusive rocks. Extrusive igneous rocks form above the surface. The lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure 	rock on the ocean floor is intrusive igneous rock	false
Igneous rocks form when magma cools and forms crystals. These rocks can form at Earths surface or deep underground. Figure 4.7 shows a landscape in Californias Sierra Nevada that consists entirely of granite. Intrusive igneous rocks cool and form into crystals beneath the surface. Deep in the Earth, magma cools slowly. Slow cooling gives large crystals a chance to form. Intrusive igneous rocks have relatively large crystals that are easy to see. Granite is the most common intrusive igneous rock. Figure 4.8 shows four types of intrusive rocks. Extrusive igneous rocks form above the surface. The lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure 	the sierra nevada mountains in california are composed mainly of granite	true
Igneous rocks are grouped by the size of their crystals and the minerals they contain. The minerals in igneous rocks are grouped into families. Some contain mostly lighter colored minerals, some have a combination of light and dark minerals, and some have mostly darker minerals. The combination of minerals is determined by the composition of the magma. Magmas that produce lighter colored minerals are higher in silica. These create rocks such as granite and rhyolite. Darker colored minerals are found in rocks such as gabbro and basalt. There are actually more than 700 different types of igneous rocks. Diorite is extremely hard and is commonly used for art. It was used extensively by ancient civilizations for vases and other decorative art work (Figure 4.11). 	a basalt looks light colored partly because its crystals are too small to see	false
Igneous rocks form when magma cools and forms crystals. These rocks can form at Earths surface or deep underground. Figure 4.7 shows a landscape in Californias Sierra Nevada that consists entirely of granite. Intrusive igneous rocks cool and form into crystals beneath the surface. Deep in the Earth, magma cools slowly. Slow cooling gives large crystals a chance to form. Intrusive igneous rocks have relatively large crystals that are easy to see. Granite is the most common intrusive igneous rock. Figure 4.8 shows four types of intrusive rocks. Extrusive igneous rocks form above the surface. The lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure 	when melted rock cools more slowly it forms larger crystals	true
Igneous rocks form when magma cools and forms crystals. These rocks can form at Earths surface or deep underground. Figure 4.7 shows a landscape in Californias Sierra Nevada that consists entirely of granite. Intrusive igneous rocks cool and form into crystals beneath the surface. Deep in the Earth, magma cools slowly. Slow cooling gives large crystals a chance to form. Intrusive igneous rocks have relatively large crystals that are easy to see. Granite is the most common intrusive igneous rock. Figure 4.8 shows four types of intrusive rocks. Extrusive igneous rocks form above the surface. The lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure 	volcanic rock may have so many gas bubbles that it can float on water	true
Igneous rocks form when magma cools and forms crystals. These rocks can form at Earths surface or deep underground. Figure 4.7 shows a landscape in Californias Sierra Nevada that consists entirely of granite. Intrusive igneous rocks cool and form into crystals beneath the surface. Deep in the Earth, magma cools slowly. Slow cooling gives large crystals a chance to form. Intrusive igneous rocks have relatively large crystals that are easy to see. Granite is the most common intrusive igneous rock. Figure 4.8 shows four types of intrusive rocks. Extrusive igneous rocks form above the surface. The lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure 	melted rock cools more quickly underground than on earths surface	false
Igneous rocks form when magma cools and forms crystals. These rocks can form at Earths surface or deep underground. Figure 4.7 shows a landscape in Californias Sierra Nevada that consists entirely of granite. Intrusive igneous rocks cool and form into crystals beneath the surface. Deep in the Earth, magma cools slowly. Slow cooling gives large crystals a chance to form. Intrusive igneous rocks have relatively large crystals that are easy to see. Granite is the most common intrusive igneous rock. Figure 4.8 shows four types of intrusive rocks. Extrusive igneous rocks form above the surface. The lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure 	obsidian forms when magma cools and forms crystals	false
Igneous rocks are grouped by the size of their crystals and the minerals they contain. The minerals in igneous rocks are grouped into families. Some contain mostly lighter colored minerals, some have a combination of light and dark minerals, and some have mostly darker minerals. The combination of minerals is determined by the composition of the magma. Magmas that produce lighter colored minerals are higher in silica. These create rocks such as granite and rhyolite. Darker colored minerals are found in rocks such as gabbro and basalt. There are actually more than 700 different types of igneous rocks. Diorite is extremely hard and is commonly used for art. It was used extensively by ancient civilizations for vases and other decorative art work (Figure 4.11). 	granite and rhyolite are high silica rocks	true
Igneous rocks form when magma cools and forms crystals. These rocks can form at Earths surface or deep underground. Figure 4.7 shows a landscape in Californias Sierra Nevada that consists entirely of granite. Intrusive igneous rocks cool and form into crystals beneath the surface. Deep in the Earth, magma cools slowly. Slow cooling gives large crystals a chance to form. Intrusive igneous rocks have relatively large crystals that are easy to see. Granite is the most common intrusive igneous rock. Figure 4.8 shows four types of intrusive rocks. Extrusive igneous rocks form above the surface. The lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure 	pumice contains holes because gas bubbles were trapped in lava as it cooled	true
Igneous rocks are grouped by the size of their crystals and the minerals they contain. The minerals in igneous rocks are grouped into families. Some contain mostly lighter colored minerals, some have a combination of light and dark minerals, and some have mostly darker minerals. The combination of minerals is determined by the composition of the magma. Magmas that produce lighter colored minerals are higher in silica. These create rocks such as granite and rhyolite. Darker colored minerals are found in rocks such as gabbro and basalt. There are actually more than 700 different types of igneous rocks. Diorite is extremely hard and is commonly used for art. It was used extensively by ancient civilizations for vases and other decorative art work (Figure 4.11). 	mountain ranges can be made mainly of igneous rocks	true
Igneous rocks are grouped by the size of their crystals and the minerals they contain. The minerals in igneous rocks are grouped into families. Some contain mostly lighter colored minerals, some have a combination of light and dark minerals, and some have mostly darker minerals. The combination of minerals is determined by the composition of the magma. Magmas that produce lighter colored minerals are higher in silica. These create rocks such as granite and rhyolite. Darker colored minerals are found in rocks such as gabbro and basalt. There are actually more than 700 different types of igneous rocks. Diorite is extremely hard and is commonly used for art. It was used extensively by ancient civilizations for vases and other decorative art work (Figure 4.11). 	igneous rock is too hard to be used for art works	false
Igneous rocks are grouped by the size of their crystals and the minerals they contain. The minerals in igneous rocks are grouped into families. Some contain mostly lighter colored minerals, some have a combination of light and dark minerals, and some have mostly darker minerals. The combination of minerals is determined by the composition of the magma. Magmas that produce lighter colored minerals are higher in silica. These create rocks such as granite and rhyolite. Darker colored minerals are found in rocks such as gabbro and basalt. There are actually more than 700 different types of igneous rocks. Diorite is extremely hard and is commonly used for art. It was used extensively by ancient civilizations for vases and other decorative art work (Figure 4.11). 	basalt crystals are too small to see with the unaided eye	true
Igneous rocks are grouped by the size of their crystals and the minerals they contain. The minerals in igneous rocks are grouped into families. Some contain mostly lighter colored minerals, some have a combination of light and dark minerals, and some have mostly darker minerals. The combination of minerals is determined by the composition of the magma. Magmas that produce lighter colored minerals are higher in silica. These create rocks such as granite and rhyolite. Darker colored minerals are found in rocks such as gabbro and basalt. There are actually more than 700 different types of igneous rocks. Diorite is extremely hard and is commonly used for art. It was used extensively by ancient civilizations for vases and other decorative art work (Figure 4.11). 	the combination of minerals in igneous rocks is determined by the composition of the magma or lava	true
Igneous rocks are grouped by the size of their crystals and the minerals they contain. The minerals in igneous rocks are grouped into families. Some contain mostly lighter colored minerals, some have a combination of light and dark minerals, and some have mostly darker minerals. The combination of minerals is determined by the composition of the magma. Magmas that produce lighter colored minerals are higher in silica. These create rocks such as granite and rhyolite. Darker colored minerals are found in rocks such as gabbro and basalt. There are actually more than 700 different types of igneous rocks. Diorite is extremely hard and is commonly used for art. It was used extensively by ancient civilizations for vases and other decorative art work (Figure 4.11). 	both porphyry and diorite are extrusive igneous rocks	true
Igneous rocks form when magma cools and forms crystals. These rocks can form at Earths surface or deep underground. Figure 4.7 shows a landscape in Californias Sierra Nevada that consists entirely of granite. Intrusive igneous rocks cool and form into crystals beneath the surface. Deep in the Earth, magma cools slowly. Slow cooling gives large crystals a chance to form. Intrusive igneous rocks have relatively large crystals that are easy to see. Granite is the most common intrusive igneous rock. Figure 4.8 shows four types of intrusive rocks. Extrusive igneous rocks form above the surface. The lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure 	any rock that forms when magma or lava cools	1.c
Igneous rocks form when magma cools and forms crystals. These rocks can form at Earths surface or deep underground. Figure 4.7 shows a landscape in Californias Sierra Nevada that consists entirely of granite. Intrusive igneous rocks cool and form into crystals beneath the surface. Deep in the Earth, magma cools slowly. Slow cooling gives large crystals a chance to form. Intrusive igneous rocks have relatively large crystals that are easy to see. Granite is the most common intrusive igneous rock. Figure 4.8 shows four types of intrusive rocks. Extrusive igneous rocks form above the surface. The lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure 	most common intrusive igneous rock	2.g
Igneous rocks form when magma cools and forms crystals. These rocks can form at Earths surface or deep underground. Figure 4.7 shows a landscape in Californias Sierra Nevada that consists entirely of granite. Intrusive igneous rocks cool and form into crystals beneath the surface. Deep in the Earth, magma cools slowly. Slow cooling gives large crystals a chance to form. Intrusive igneous rocks have relatively large crystals that are easy to see. Granite is the most common intrusive igneous rock. Figure 4.8 shows four types of intrusive rocks. Extrusive igneous rocks form above the surface. The lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure 	type of igneous rock that forms on earths surface	3.a
Igneous rocks form when magma cools and forms crystals. These rocks can form at Earths surface or deep underground. Figure 4.7 shows a landscape in Californias Sierra Nevada that consists entirely of granite. Intrusive igneous rocks cool and form into crystals beneath the surface. Deep in the Earth, magma cools slowly. Slow cooling gives large crystals a chance to form. Intrusive igneous rocks have relatively large crystals that are easy to see. Granite is the most common intrusive igneous rock. Figure 4.8 shows four types of intrusive rocks. Extrusive igneous rocks form above the surface. The lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure 	igneous rock that is full of holes	4.f
Igneous rocks form when magma cools and forms crystals. These rocks can form at Earths surface or deep underground. Figure 4.7 shows a landscape in Californias Sierra Nevada that consists entirely of granite. Intrusive igneous rocks cool and form into crystals beneath the surface. Deep in the Earth, magma cools slowly. Slow cooling gives large crystals a chance to form. Intrusive igneous rocks have relatively large crystals that are easy to see. Granite is the most common intrusive igneous rock. Figure 4.8 shows four types of intrusive rocks. Extrusive igneous rocks form above the surface. The lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure 	most common extrusive igneous rock	5.b
Igneous rocks form when magma cools and forms crystals. These rocks can form at Earths surface or deep underground. Figure 4.7 shows a landscape in Californias Sierra Nevada that consists entirely of granite. Intrusive igneous rocks cool and form into crystals beneath the surface. Deep in the Earth, magma cools slowly. Slow cooling gives large crystals a chance to form. Intrusive igneous rocks have relatively large crystals that are easy to see. Granite is the most common intrusive igneous rock. Figure 4.8 shows four types of intrusive rocks. Extrusive igneous rocks form above the surface. The lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface (Figure 	type of igneous rock that forms beneath earths surface	6.d
Igneous rocks are grouped by the size of their crystals and the minerals they contain. The minerals in igneous rocks are grouped into families. Some contain mostly lighter colored minerals, some have a combination of light and dark minerals, and some have mostly darker minerals. The combination of minerals is determined by the composition of the magma. Magmas that produce lighter colored minerals are higher in silica. These create rocks such as granite and rhyolite. Darker colored minerals are found in rocks such as gabbro and basalt. There are actually more than 700 different types of igneous rocks. Diorite is extremely hard and is commonly used for art. It was used extensively by ancient civilizations for vases and other decorative art work (Figure 4.11). 	glasslike igneous rock that does not contain mineral crystals	7.e
Chemical sedimentary rocks form when crystals precipitate out from a liquid. The mineral halite, also called rock salt, forms this way. You can make halite! Leave a shallow dish of salt water out in the Sun. As the water evaporates, salt crystals form in the dish. There are other chemical sedimentary rocks, like gypsum. Table 4.1 shows some common types of sedimentary rocks and the types of sediments that make them up. Picture Rock Name Conglomerate Type of Sedimentary Rock Clastic Breccia Clastic Sandstone Clastic Siltstone Clastic Limestone Bioclastic Coal Organic Picture Rock Name Rock Salt Type of Sedimentary Rock Chemical precipitate 	sandstone is very porous so water can move easily through it	true
Sedimentary rocks form in two ways. Particles may be cemented together. Chemicals may precipitate. 	sedimentary rocks may contain fossils	true
Most sedimentary rocks form from sediments. Sediments are small pieces of other rocks, like pebbles, sand, silt, and clay. Sedimentary rocks may include fossils. Fossils are materials left behind by once-living organisms. Fossils can be pieces of the organism, like bones. They can also be traces of the organism, like footprints. Most often, sediments settle out of water (Figure 4.13). For example, rivers carry lots of sediment. Where the water slows, it dumps these sediments along its banks, into lakes and the ocean. When sediments settle out of water, they form horizontal layers. A layer of sediment is deposited. Then the next layer is deposited on top of that layer. So each layer in a sedimentary rock is younger than the layer under it. It is older than the layer over it. Sediments are deposited in many different types of environments. Beaches and deserts collect large deposits of sand. Sediments also continuously wind up at the bottom of the ocean and in lakes, ponds, rivers, marshes, and swamps. Avalanches produce large piles of sediment. The environment where the sediments are deposited determines the type of sedimentary rock that can form. 	avalanches produce horizontal layers of sediments	false
Sedimentary rocks form in two ways. Particles may be cemented together. Chemicals may precipitate. 	like minerals rocks cannot include organic materials	false
Sedimentary rocks form in two ways. Particles may be cemented together. Chemicals may precipitate. 	particles of silt are smaller than particles of clay	false
Chemical sedimentary rocks form when crystals precipitate out from a liquid. The mineral halite, also called rock salt, forms this way. You can make halite! Leave a shallow dish of salt water out in the Sun. As the water evaporates, salt crystals form in the dish. There are other chemical sedimentary rocks, like gypsum. Table 4.1 shows some common types of sedimentary rocks and the types of sediments that make them up. Picture Rock Name Conglomerate Type of Sedimentary Rock Clastic Breccia Clastic Sandstone Clastic Siltstone Clastic Limestone Bioclastic Coal Organic Picture Rock Name Rock Salt Type of Sedimentary Rock Chemical precipitate 	breccia and conglomerate have large sediments that have different shapes	true
Most sedimentary rocks form from sediments. Sediments are small pieces of other rocks, like pebbles, sand, silt, and clay. Sedimentary rocks may include fossils. Fossils are materials left behind by once-living organisms. Fossils can be pieces of the organism, like bones. They can also be traces of the organism, like footprints. Most often, sediments settle out of water (Figure 4.13). For example, rivers carry lots of sediment. Where the water slows, it dumps these sediments along its banks, into lakes and the ocean. When sediments settle out of water, they form horizontal layers. A layer of sediment is deposited. Then the next layer is deposited on top of that layer. So each layer in a sedimentary rock is younger than the layer under it. It is older than the layer over it. Sediments are deposited in many different types of environments. Beaches and deserts collect large deposits of sand. Sediments also continuously wind up at the bottom of the ocean and in lakes, ponds, rivers, marshes, and swamps. Avalanches produce large piles of sediment. The environment where the sediments are deposited determines the type of sedimentary rock that can form. 	fossils are always the remains of bones or teeth	false
Chemical sedimentary rocks form when crystals precipitate out from a liquid. The mineral halite, also called rock salt, forms this way. You can make halite! Leave a shallow dish of salt water out in the Sun. As the water evaporates, salt crystals form in the dish. There are other chemical sedimentary rocks, like gypsum. Table 4.1 shows some common types of sedimentary rocks and the types of sediments that make them up. Picture Rock Name Conglomerate Type of Sedimentary Rock Clastic Breccia Clastic Sandstone Clastic Siltstone Clastic Limestone Bioclastic Coal Organic Picture Rock Name Rock Salt Type of Sedimentary Rock Chemical precipitate 	sediments are pieces of rock	true
Sedimentary rocks form in two ways. Particles may be cemented together. Chemicals may precipitate. 	coal is not a sedimentary rock	false
Most sedimentary rocks form from sediments. Sediments are small pieces of other rocks, like pebbles, sand, silt, and clay. Sedimentary rocks may include fossils. Fossils are materials left behind by once-living organisms. Fossils can be pieces of the organism, like bones. They can also be traces of the organism, like footprints. Most often, sediments settle out of water (Figure 4.13). For example, rivers carry lots of sediment. Where the water slows, it dumps these sediments along its banks, into lakes and the ocean. When sediments settle out of water, they form horizontal layers. A layer of sediment is deposited. Then the next layer is deposited on top of that layer. So each layer in a sedimentary rock is younger than the layer under it. It is older than the layer over it. Sediments are deposited in many different types of environments. Beaches and deserts collect large deposits of sand. Sediments also continuously wind up at the bottom of the ocean and in lakes, ponds, rivers, marshes, and swamps. Avalanches produce large piles of sediment. The environment where the sediments are deposited determines the type of sedimentary rock that can form. 	sediments on a beach may include cobbles and pebbles	true
Over time, deposited sediments may harden into rock. First, the sediments are compacted. That is, they are squeezed together by the weight of sediments on top of them. Next, the sediments are cemented together. Minerals fill in the spaces between the loose sediment particles. These cementing minerals come from the water that moves through the sediments. These types of sedimentary rocks are called clastic rocks. Clastic rocks are rock fragments that are compacted and cemented together. Clastic sedimentary rocks are grouped by the size of the sediment they contain. Conglomerate and breccia are made of individual stones that have been cemented together. In conglomerate, the stones are rounded. In breccia, the stones are angular. Sandstone is made of sand-sized particles. Siltstone is made of smaller particles. Silt is smaller than sand but larger than clay. Shale has the smallest grain size. Shale is made mostly of clay-sized particles and hardened mud. 	cementation occurs when the fluids in the free spaces of the sediments crystallize	true
Chemical sedimentary rocks form when crystals precipitate out from a liquid. The mineral halite, also called rock salt, forms this way. You can make halite! Leave a shallow dish of salt water out in the Sun. As the water evaporates, salt crystals form in the dish. There are other chemical sedimentary rocks, like gypsum. Table 4.1 shows some common types of sedimentary rocks and the types of sediments that make them up. Picture Rock Name Conglomerate Type of Sedimentary Rock Clastic Breccia Clastic Sandstone Clastic Siltstone Clastic Limestone Bioclastic Coal Organic Picture Rock Name Rock Salt Type of Sedimentary Rock Chemical precipitate 	a rock that includes fossil fragments is a bioclastic rock	true
Sedimentary rocks form in two ways. Particles may be cemented together. Chemicals may precipitate. 	all sedimentary rocks form from sediments	false
Over time, deposited sediments may harden into rock. First, the sediments are compacted. That is, they are squeezed together by the weight of sediments on top of them. Next, the sediments are cemented together. Minerals fill in the spaces between the loose sediment particles. These cementing minerals come from the water that moves through the sediments. These types of sedimentary rocks are called clastic rocks. Clastic rocks are rock fragments that are compacted and cemented together. Clastic sedimentary rocks are grouped by the size of the sediment they contain. Conglomerate and breccia are made of individual stones that have been cemented together. In conglomerate, the stones are rounded. In breccia, the stones are angular. Sandstone is made of sand-sized particles. Siltstone is made of smaller particles. Silt is smaller than sand but larger than clay. Shale has the smallest grain size. Shale is made mostly of clay-sized particles and hardened mud. 	shale may contain hardened mud	true
Sedimentary rocks form in two ways. Particles may be cemented together. Chemicals may precipitate. 	limestone is a chemical sedimentary rock	false
Sedimentary rocks form in two ways. Particles may be cemented together. Chemicals may precipitate. 	type of sedimentary rock that forms when crystals precipitate out of liquid	1.g
Over time, deposited sediments may harden into rock. First, the sediments are compacted. That is, they are squeezed together by the weight of sediments on top of them. Next, the sediments are cemented together. Minerals fill in the spaces between the loose sediment particles. These cementing minerals come from the water that moves through the sediments. These types of sedimentary rocks are called clastic rocks. Clastic rocks are rock fragments that are compacted and cemented together. Clastic sedimentary rocks are grouped by the size of the sediment they contain. Conglomerate and breccia are made of individual stones that have been cemented together. In conglomerate, the stones are rounded. In breccia, the stones are angular. Sandstone is made of sand-sized particles. Siltstone is made of smaller particles. Silt is smaller than sand but larger than clay. Shale has the smallest grain size. Shale is made mostly of clay-sized particles and hardened mud. 	squeezed together by upper layers of sediments	2.c
Sedimentary rocks form in two ways. Particles may be cemented together. Chemicals may precipitate. 	type of sedimentary rock that forms when rock fragments are compacted and cemented together	3.b
Most sedimentary rocks form from sediments. Sediments are small pieces of other rocks, like pebbles, sand, silt, and clay. Sedimentary rocks may include fossils. Fossils are materials left behind by once-living organisms. Fossils can be pieces of the organism, like bones. They can also be traces of the organism, like footprints. Most often, sediments settle out of water (Figure 4.13). For example, rivers carry lots of sediment. Where the water slows, it dumps these sediments along its banks, into lakes and the ocean. When sediments settle out of water, they form horizontal layers. A layer of sediment is deposited. Then the next layer is deposited on top of that layer. So each layer in a sedimentary rock is younger than the layer under it. It is older than the layer over it. Sediments are deposited in many different types of environments. Beaches and deserts collect large deposits of sand. Sediments also continuously wind up at the bottom of the ocean and in lakes, ponds, rivers, marshes, and swamps. Avalanches produce large piles of sediment. The environment where the sediments are deposited determines the type of sedimentary rock that can form. 	preserved material left behind by a onceliving organism	4.f
Over time, deposited sediments may harden into rock. First, the sediments are compacted. That is, they are squeezed together by the weight of sediments on top of them. Next, the sediments are cemented together. Minerals fill in the spaces between the loose sediment particles. These cementing minerals come from the water that moves through the sediments. These types of sedimentary rocks are called clastic rocks. Clastic rocks are rock fragments that are compacted and cemented together. Clastic sedimentary rocks are grouped by the size of the sediment they contain. Conglomerate and breccia are made of individual stones that have been cemented together. In conglomerate, the stones are rounded. In breccia, the stones are angular. Sandstone is made of sand-sized particles. Siltstone is made of smaller particles. Silt is smaller than sand but larger than clay. Shale has the smallest grain size. Shale is made mostly of clay-sized particles and hardened mud. 	stuck together by minerals that fill in spaces between sediments	5.a
Sedimentary rocks form in two ways. Particles may be cemented together. Chemicals may precipitate. 	example of a clastic sedimentary rock	6. d
Sedimentary rocks form in two ways. Particles may be cemented together. Chemicals may precipitate. 	example of a chemical sedimentary rock	7. e
Metamorphic rocks start off as some kind of rock. The starting rock can be igneous, sedimentary or even another metamorphic rock. Heat and/or pressure then change the rocks physical or chemical makeup. During metamorphism a rock may change chemically. Ions move and new minerals form. The new minerals are more stable in the new environment. Extreme pressure may lead to physical changes like foliation. Foliation forms as the rocks are squeezed. If pressure is exerted from one direction, the rock forms layers. This is foliation. If pressure is exerted from all directions, the rock usually does not show foliation. There are two main types of metamorphism: 1. Contact metamorphism results when magma contacts a rock, changing it by extreme heat (Figure 4.14). 2. Regional metamorphism occurs over a wide area. Great masses of rock are exposed to pressure from rock and sediment layers on top of it. The rock may also be compressed by other geological processes. Metamorphism does not cause a rock to melt completely. It only causes the minerals to change by heat or pressure. Hornfels is a rock with alternating bands of dark and light crystals. Hornfels is a good example of how minerals rearrange themselves during metamorphism (Figure 4.14). The minerals in hornfels separate by density. The result is that the rock becomes banded. Gneiss forms by regional metamorphism from extremely high temperature and pressure. 	type of metamorphism in which magma contacts a rock and changes it by extreme heat	1.c
Metamorphic rocks start off as some kind of rock. The starting rock can be igneous, sedimentary or even another metamorphic rock. Heat and/or pressure then change the rocks physical or chemical makeup. During metamorphism a rock may change chemically. Ions move and new minerals form. The new minerals are more stable in the new environment. Extreme pressure may lead to physical changes like foliation. Foliation forms as the rocks are squeezed. If pressure is exerted from one direction, the rock forms layers. This is foliation. If pressure is exerted from all directions, the rock usually does not show foliation. There are two main types of metamorphism: 1. Contact metamorphism results when magma contacts a rock, changing it by extreme heat (Figure 4.14). 2. Regional metamorphism occurs over a wide area. Great masses of rock are exposed to pressure from rock and sediment layers on top of it. The rock may also be compressed by other geological processes. Metamorphism does not cause a rock to melt completely. It only causes the minerals to change by heat or pressure. Hornfels is a rock with alternating bands of dark and light crystals. Hornfels is a good example of how minerals rearrange themselves during metamorphism (Figure 4.14). The minerals in hornfels separate by density. The result is that the rock becomes banded. Gneiss forms by regional metamorphism from extremely high temperature and pressure. 	any rock formed by extreme heat and pressure	2.b
Metamorphic rocks start off as some kind of rock. The starting rock can be igneous, sedimentary or even another metamorphic rock. Heat and/or pressure then change the rocks physical or chemical makeup. During metamorphism a rock may change chemically. Ions move and new minerals form. The new minerals are more stable in the new environment. Extreme pressure may lead to physical changes like foliation. Foliation forms as the rocks are squeezed. If pressure is exerted from one direction, the rock forms layers. This is foliation. If pressure is exerted from all directions, the rock usually does not show foliation. There are two main types of metamorphism: 1. Contact metamorphism results when magma contacts a rock, changing it by extreme heat (Figure 4.14). 2. Regional metamorphism occurs over a wide area. Great masses of rock are exposed to pressure from rock and sediment layers on top of it. The rock may also be compressed by other geological processes. Metamorphism does not cause a rock to melt completely. It only causes the minerals to change by heat or pressure. Hornfels is a rock with alternating bands of dark and light crystals. Hornfels is a good example of how minerals rearrange themselves during metamorphism (Figure 4.14). The minerals in hornfels separate by density. The result is that the rock becomes banded. Gneiss forms by regional metamorphism from extremely high temperature and pressure. 	metamorphic rock with alternating bands of light and dark crystals	3.d
Metamorphic rocks start off as some kind of rock. The starting rock can be igneous, sedimentary or even another metamorphic rock. Heat and/or pressure then change the rocks physical or chemical makeup. During metamorphism a rock may change chemically. Ions move and new minerals form. The new minerals are more stable in the new environment. Extreme pressure may lead to physical changes like foliation. Foliation forms as the rocks are squeezed. If pressure is exerted from one direction, the rock forms layers. This is foliation. If pressure is exerted from all directions, the rock usually does not show foliation. There are two main types of metamorphism: 1. Contact metamorphism results when magma contacts a rock, changing it by extreme heat (Figure 4.14). 2. Regional metamorphism occurs over a wide area. Great masses of rock are exposed to pressure from rock and sediment layers on top of it. The rock may also be compressed by other geological processes. Metamorphism does not cause a rock to melt completely. It only causes the minerals to change by heat or pressure. Hornfels is a rock with alternating bands of dark and light crystals. Hornfels is a good example of how minerals rearrange themselves during metamorphism (Figure 4.14). The minerals in hornfels separate by density. The result is that the rock becomes banded. Gneiss forms by regional metamorphism from extremely high temperature and pressure. 	type of metamorphism in which great masses of rock are exposed to extreme pressure	4.a
Metamorphic rocks start off as some kind of rock. The starting rock can be igneous, sedimentary or even another metamorphic rock. Heat and/or pressure then change the rocks physical or chemical makeup. During metamorphism a rock may change chemically. Ions move and new minerals form. The new minerals are more stable in the new environment. Extreme pressure may lead to physical changes like foliation. Foliation forms as the rocks are squeezed. If pressure is exerted from one direction, the rock forms layers. This is foliation. If pressure is exerted from all directions, the rock usually does not show foliation. There are two main types of metamorphism: 1. Contact metamorphism results when magma contacts a rock, changing it by extreme heat (Figure 4.14). 2. Regional metamorphism occurs over a wide area. Great masses of rock are exposed to pressure from rock and sediment layers on top of it. The rock may also be compressed by other geological processes. Metamorphism does not cause a rock to melt completely. It only causes the minerals to change by heat or pressure. Hornfels is a rock with alternating bands of dark and light crystals. Hornfels is a good example of how minerals rearrange themselves during metamorphism (Figure 4.14). The minerals in hornfels separate by density. The result is that the rock becomes banded. Gneiss forms by regional metamorphism from extremely high temperature and pressure. 	formation of layers in some metamorphic rock	5.e
Quartzite and marble are the most commonly used metamorphic rocks. They are frequently chosen for building materials and artwork. Marble is used for statues and decorative items like vases (Figure 4.16). Quartzite is very hard and is often crushed and used in building railroad tracks. Schist and slate are sometimes used as building and landscape materials. 	metamorphic rock that is crushed and used to build railroad tracks	6.g
Quartzite and marble are the most commonly used metamorphic rocks. They are frequently chosen for building materials and artwork. Marble is used for statues and decorative items like vases (Figure 4.16). Quartzite is very hard and is often crushed and used in building railroad tracks. Schist and slate are sometimes used as building and landscape materials. 	metamorphic rock that is used to make statues	7.f
Metamorphic rocks start off as some kind of rock. The starting rock can be igneous, sedimentary or even another metamorphic rock. Heat and/or pressure then change the rocks physical or chemical makeup. During metamorphism a rock may change chemically. Ions move and new minerals form. The new minerals are more stable in the new environment. Extreme pressure may lead to physical changes like foliation. Foliation forms as the rocks are squeezed. If pressure is exerted from one direction, the rock forms layers. This is foliation. If pressure is exerted from all directions, the rock usually does not show foliation. There are two main types of metamorphism: 1. Contact metamorphism results when magma contacts a rock, changing it by extreme heat (Figure 4.14). 2. Regional metamorphism occurs over a wide area. Great masses of rock are exposed to pressure from rock and sediment layers on top of it. The rock may also be compressed by other geological processes. Metamorphism does not cause a rock to melt completely. It only causes the minerals to change by heat or pressure. Hornfels is a rock with alternating bands of dark and light crystals. Hornfels is a good example of how minerals rearrange themselves during metamorphism (Figure 4.14). The minerals in hornfels separate by density. The result is that the rock becomes banded. Gneiss forms by regional metamorphism from extremely high temperature and pressure. 	foliation occurs when pressure is exerted from all directions equally	false
Metamorphic rocks start off as some kind of rock. The starting rock can be igneous, sedimentary or even another metamorphic rock. Heat and/or pressure then change the rocks physical or chemical makeup. During metamorphism a rock may change chemically. Ions move and new minerals form. The new minerals are more stable in the new environment. Extreme pressure may lead to physical changes like foliation. Foliation forms as the rocks are squeezed. If pressure is exerted from one direction, the rock forms layers. This is foliation. If pressure is exerted from all directions, the rock usually does not show foliation. There are two main types of metamorphism: 1. Contact metamorphism results when magma contacts a rock, changing it by extreme heat (Figure 4.14). 2. Regional metamorphism occurs over a wide area. Great masses of rock are exposed to pressure from rock and sediment layers on top of it. The rock may also be compressed by other geological processes. Metamorphism does not cause a rock to melt completely. It only causes the minerals to change by heat or pressure. Hornfels is a rock with alternating bands of dark and light crystals. Hornfels is a good example of how minerals rearrange themselves during metamorphism (Figure 4.14). The minerals in hornfels separate by density. The result is that the rock becomes banded. Gneiss forms by regional metamorphism from extremely high temperature and pressure. 	regional metamorphism may expose rocks to high pressure and low temperature	true
Quartzite and marble are the most commonly used metamorphic rocks. They are frequently chosen for building materials and artwork. Marble is used for statues and decorative items like vases (Figure 4.16). Quartzite is very hard and is often crushed and used in building railroad tracks. Schist and slate are sometimes used as building and landscape materials. 	a metamorphic rock can be metamorphosed	true
Quartzite and marble are the most commonly used metamorphic rocks. They are frequently chosen for building materials and artwork. Marble is used for statues and decorative items like vases (Figure 4.16). Quartzite is very hard and is often crushed and used in building railroad tracks. Schist and slate are sometimes used as building and landscape materials. 	a metamorphic rock nearly always resembles its original parent rock	false
Quartzite and marble are the most commonly used metamorphic rocks. They are frequently chosen for building materials and artwork. Marble is used for statues and decorative items like vases (Figure 4.16). Quartzite is very hard and is often crushed and used in building railroad tracks. Schist and slate are sometimes used as building and landscape materials. 	metamorphic rocks can always be distinguished from igneous and sedimentary rocks because they are	false
Metamorphic rocks start off as some kind of rock. The starting rock can be igneous, sedimentary or even another metamorphic rock. Heat and/or pressure then change the rocks physical or chemical makeup. During metamorphism a rock may change chemically. Ions move and new minerals form. The new minerals are more stable in the new environment. Extreme pressure may lead to physical changes like foliation. Foliation forms as the rocks are squeezed. If pressure is exerted from one direction, the rock forms layers. This is foliation. If pressure is exerted from all directions, the rock usually does not show foliation. There are two main types of metamorphism: 1. Contact metamorphism results when magma contacts a rock, changing it by extreme heat (Figure 4.14). 2. Regional metamorphism occurs over a wide area. Great masses of rock are exposed to pressure from rock and sediment layers on top of it. The rock may also be compressed by other geological processes. Metamorphism does not cause a rock to melt completely. It only causes the minerals to change by heat or pressure. Hornfels is a rock with alternating bands of dark and light crystals. Hornfels is a good example of how minerals rearrange themselves during metamorphism (Figure 4.14). The minerals in hornfels separate by density. The result is that the rock becomes banded. Gneiss forms by regional metamorphism from extremely high temperature and pressure. 	when a rock undergoes metamorphism it becomes an entirely new type of rock	true
Metamorphic rocks start off as some kind of rock. The starting rock can be igneous, sedimentary or even another metamorphic rock. Heat and/or pressure then change the rocks physical or chemical makeup. During metamorphism a rock may change chemically. Ions move and new minerals form. The new minerals are more stable in the new environment. Extreme pressure may lead to physical changes like foliation. Foliation forms as the rocks are squeezed. If pressure is exerted from one direction, the rock forms layers. This is foliation. If pressure is exerted from all directions, the rock usually does not show foliation. There are two main types of metamorphism: 1. Contact metamorphism results when magma contacts a rock, changing it by extreme heat (Figure 4.14). 2. Regional metamorphism occurs over a wide area. Great masses of rock are exposed to pressure from rock and sediment layers on top of it. The rock may also be compressed by other geological processes. Metamorphism does not cause a rock to melt completely. It only causes the minerals to change by heat or pressure. Hornfels is a rock with alternating bands of dark and light crystals. Hornfels is a good example of how minerals rearrange themselves during metamorphism (Figure 4.14). The minerals in hornfels separate by density. The result is that the rock becomes banded. Gneiss forms by regional metamorphism from extremely high temperature and pressure. 	during metamorphism ions may move and new minerals may form	true
Metamorphic rocks start off as some kind of rock. The starting rock can be igneous, sedimentary or even another metamorphic rock. Heat and/or pressure then change the rocks physical or chemical makeup. During metamorphism a rock may change chemically. Ions move and new minerals form. The new minerals are more stable in the new environment. Extreme pressure may lead to physical changes like foliation. Foliation forms as the rocks are squeezed. If pressure is exerted from one direction, the rock forms layers. This is foliation. If pressure is exerted from all directions, the rock usually does not show foliation. There are two main types of metamorphism: 1. Contact metamorphism results when magma contacts a rock, changing it by extreme heat (Figure 4.14). 2. Regional metamorphism occurs over a wide area. Great masses of rock are exposed to pressure from rock and sediment layers on top of it. The rock may also be compressed by other geological processes. Metamorphism does not cause a rock to melt completely. It only causes the minerals to change by heat or pressure. Hornfels is a rock with alternating bands of dark and light crystals. Hornfels is a good example of how minerals rearrange themselves during metamorphism (Figure 4.14). The minerals in hornfels separate by density. The result is that the rock becomes banded. Gneiss forms by regional metamorphism from extremely high temperature and pressure. 	there are two types of metamorphism	true
Metamorphic rocks start off as some kind of rock. The starting rock can be igneous, sedimentary or even another metamorphic rock. Heat and/or pressure then change the rocks physical or chemical makeup. During metamorphism a rock may change chemically. Ions move and new minerals form. The new minerals are more stable in the new environment. Extreme pressure may lead to physical changes like foliation. Foliation forms as the rocks are squeezed. If pressure is exerted from one direction, the rock forms layers. This is foliation. If pressure is exerted from all directions, the rock usually does not show foliation. There are two main types of metamorphism: 1. Contact metamorphism results when magma contacts a rock, changing it by extreme heat (Figure 4.14). 2. Regional metamorphism occurs over a wide area. Great masses of rock are exposed to pressure from rock and sediment layers on top of it. The rock may also be compressed by other geological processes. Metamorphism does not cause a rock to melt completely. It only causes the minerals to change by heat or pressure. Hornfels is a rock with alternating bands of dark and light crystals. Hornfels is a good example of how minerals rearrange themselves during metamorphism (Figure 4.14). The minerals in hornfels separate by density. The result is that the rock becomes banded. Gneiss forms by regional metamorphism from extremely high temperature and pressure. 	contact metamorphism causes rock to melt and form magma	false
Quartzite and marble are the most commonly used metamorphic rocks. They are frequently chosen for building materials and artwork. Marble is used for statues and decorative items like vases (Figure 4.16). Quartzite is very hard and is often crushed and used in building railroad tracks. Schist and slate are sometimes used as building and landscape materials. 	the most commonly used metamorphic rocks are slate and gneiss	false
Quartzite and marble are the most commonly used metamorphic rocks. They are frequently chosen for building materials and artwork. Marble is used for statues and decorative items like vases (Figure 4.16). Quartzite is very hard and is often crushed and used in building railroad tracks. Schist and slate are sometimes used as building and landscape materials. 	quartzite is a relatively soft metamorphic rock	false
Metamorphic rocks start off as some kind of rock. The starting rock can be igneous, sedimentary or even another metamorphic rock. Heat and/or pressure then change the rocks physical or chemical makeup. During metamorphism a rock may change chemically. Ions move and new minerals form. The new minerals are more stable in the new environment. Extreme pressure may lead to physical changes like foliation. Foliation forms as the rocks are squeezed. If pressure is exerted from one direction, the rock forms layers. This is foliation. If pressure is exerted from all directions, the rock usually does not show foliation. There are two main types of metamorphism: 1. Contact metamorphism results when magma contacts a rock, changing it by extreme heat (Figure 4.14). 2. Regional metamorphism occurs over a wide area. Great masses of rock are exposed to pressure from rock and sediment layers on top of it. The rock may also be compressed by other geological processes. Metamorphism does not cause a rock to melt completely. It only causes the minerals to change by heat or pressure. Hornfels is a rock with alternating bands of dark and light crystals. Hornfels is a good example of how minerals rearrange themselves during metamorphism (Figure 4.14). The minerals in hornfels separate by density. The result is that the rock becomes banded. Gneiss forms by regional metamorphism from extremely high temperature and pressure. 	gneiss forms by contact metamorphism	false
Quartzite and marble are the most commonly used metamorphic rocks. They are frequently chosen for building materials and artwork. Marble is used for statues and decorative items like vases (Figure 4.16). Quartzite is very hard and is often crushed and used in building railroad tracks. Schist and slate are sometimes used as building and landscape materials. 	schist is sometimes used as a landscaping material	true
Quartzite and marble are the most commonly used metamorphic rocks. They are frequently chosen for building materials and artwork. Marble is used for statues and decorative items like vases (Figure 4.16). Quartzite is very hard and is often crushed and used in building railroad tracks. Schist and slate are sometimes used as building and landscape materials. 	in the 1500s michelangelo carved statues from marble	true
Quartzite and marble are the most commonly used metamorphic rocks. They are frequently chosen for building materials and artwork. Marble is used for statues and decorative items like vases (Figure 4.16). Quartzite is very hard and is often crushed and used in building railroad tracks. Schist and slate are sometimes used as building and landscape materials. 	metamorphic rocks cannot undergo further metamorphism and change to different types of rocks	false
Energy is the ability to do work. Fuel stores energy and can be released to do work. Heat is given off when fuel is burned. 	any material that stores energy and releases it in a chemical change	1.g
Energy changes form when something happens. But the total amount of energy always stays the same. The Law of Conservation of Energy says that energy cannot be created or destroyed. Scientists observed that energy could change from one form to another. They also observed that the overall amount of energy did not change. 	law that energy cannot be created or destroyed	2.f
Energy is the ability to do work. Fuel stores energy and can be released to do work. Heat is given off when fuel is burned. 	energy that has the potential to do work	3.e
Fossil fuels include coal, oil, and natural gas. Fossil fuels are the greatest energy source for modern society. Millions of years ago, plants used energy from the Sun to form carbon compounds. These compounds were later transformed into coal, oil, or natural gas. Fossil fuels take millions of years to form. For this reason, they are non-renewable. We will use most fossil fuels up in a matter of decades. Burning fossil fuels releases large amounts of pollution. The most important of these may be the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide. 	coal oil or natural gas	4.d
Energy is the ability to do work. Fuel stores energy and can be released to do work. Heat is given off when fuel is burned. 	ability to move or change matter	5.a
Energy is the ability to do work. Fuel stores energy and can be released to do work. Heat is given off when fuel is burned. 	form of energy obtained from food	6.b
Energy is the ability to do work. Fuel stores energy and can be released to do work. Heat is given off when fuel is burned. 	energy of moving matter	7.c
Energy is the ability to do work. Fuel stores energy and can be released to do work. Heat is given off when fuel is burned. 	plants make food using energy from soil nutrients	false
Fossil fuels include coal, oil, and natural gas. Fossil fuels are the greatest energy source for modern society. Millions of years ago, plants used energy from the Sun to form carbon compounds. These compounds were later transformed into coal, oil, or natural gas. Fossil fuels take millions of years to form. For this reason, they are non-renewable. We will use most fossil fuels up in a matter of decades. Burning fossil fuels releases large amounts of pollution. The most important of these may be the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide. 	fossil fuels are made of minerals and rocks	false
Almost all energy comes from the Sun. Plants make food energy from sunlight. Fossil fuels are made of the remains of plants and animals that stored the Suns energy millions of years ago. The Sun heats some areas more than others, which causes wind. The Suns energy also drives the water cycle, which moves water over the surface of the Earth. Both wind and water power can be used as renewable resources. Earths internal heat does not depend on the Sun for energy. This heat comes from remnant heat when the planet formed. It also comes from the decay of radioactive elements. Radioactivity is an important source of energy. 	uneven heating by the sun causes wind	true
Energy is the ability to do work. Fuel stores energy and can be released to do work. Heat is given off when fuel is burned. 	the suns energy drives the water cycle	true
Here is an example of how energy changes form: kicking a soccer ball. Your body gets energy from food. Where does the food get its energy? If youre eating a plant, then the energy comes directly from the Sun. If youre eating an animal, then the energy comes from a plant that got its energy from the Sun. Your body breaks down the food. It converts the food to chemical energy and stores it. When you are about to kick the ball, the energy must be changed again. Potential energy has the potential to do work. When your leg is poised to kick the ball but is not yet moving, your leg has potential energy. A ball at the top of a hill has the potential energy of location. Kinetic energy is the energy of anything in motion. Your muscles move your leg, your foot kicks the ball, and the ball gains kinetic energy (Figure 5.1). The kinetic energy was converted from potential energy that was in your leg before the kick. The action of kicking the ball is energy changing forms. The same is true for anything that involves change. 	kicking a soccer ball changes kinetic energy to potential energy	false
Energy is the ability to do work. Fuel stores energy and can be released to do work. Heat is given off when fuel is burned. 	the head of a match stores chemical energy	true
Fossil fuels include coal, oil, and natural gas. Fossil fuels are the greatest energy source for modern society. Millions of years ago, plants used energy from the Sun to form carbon compounds. These compounds were later transformed into coal, oil, or natural gas. Fossil fuels take millions of years to form. For this reason, they are non-renewable. We will use most fossil fuels up in a matter of decades. Burning fossil fuels releases large amounts of pollution. The most important of these may be the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide. 	it takes millions of years for fossil fuels to form	true
Fossil fuels include coal, oil, and natural gas. Fossil fuels are the greatest energy source for modern society. Millions of years ago, plants used energy from the Sun to form carbon compounds. These compounds were later transformed into coal, oil, or natural gas. Fossil fuels take millions of years to form. For this reason, they are non-renewable. We will use most fossil fuels up in a matter of decades. Burning fossil fuels releases large amounts of pollution. The most important of these may be the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide. 	most fossil fuels will last for another 500 years	false
Energy is the ability to do work. Fuel stores energy and can be released to do work. Heat is given off when fuel is burned. 	trees are a source of biomass energy	true
Energy is the ability to do work. Fuel stores energy and can be released to do work. Heat is given off when fuel is burned. 	geothermal energy is a nonrenewable resource	false
Processing natural gas has harmful effects on the environment, just like oil. Natural gas burns cleaner than other fossil fuels. As a result, it causes less air pollution. It also produces less carbon dioxide than the other fossil fuels. Still, natural gas does emit pollutants. 	fossil fuel that produces the least pollution when burned	1.d
Coal is a solid hydrocarbon. Coal is useful as a fuel, especially for generating electricity. 	hardest form of coal	2.f
Coal is a solid hydrocarbon. Coal is useful as a fuel, especially for generating electricity. 	solid fossil fuel	3.g
Natural gas is often found along with coal or oil in underground deposits. This is because natural gas forms with these other fossil fuels. One difference between natural gas and oil is that natural gas forms at higher temperatures. 	fossil fuels come from the remains of ancient organisms	true
Nuclear energy is produced by splitting the nucleus of an atom. This releases a huge amount of energy. 	element used to produce nuclear power	4.c
Oil comes out of the ground as crude oil. Crude oil is a mixture of many different hydrocarbons. Oil is separated into different compounds at an oil refinery (Figure 5.4). This is done by heating the oil. Each hydrocarbon compound in crude oil boils at a different temperature. We get gasoline, diesel, and heating oil, plus waxes, plastics, and fertilizers from crude oil. These fuels are rich sources of energy. Since they are mostly liquids they can be easily transported. These fuels provide about 90% of the energy used for transportation around the world. 	hydrocarbons are all liquids like gasoline	false
Coal is a solid hydrocarbon. Coal is useful as a fuel, especially for generating electricity. 	liquid fossil fuel	5.e
Natural gas is mostly methane. 	main component of natural gas	6.a
Natural gas is mostly methane. 	oil and gas will fill our needs for a time period on the order of thousands of years	false
Processing natural gas has harmful effects on the environment, just like oil. Natural gas burns cleaner than other fossil fuels. As a result, it causes less air pollution. It also produces less carbon dioxide than the other fossil fuels. Still, natural gas does emit pollutants. 	any compound consisting of carbon and hydrogen	7.b
Nuclear energy is produced by splitting the nucleus of an atom. This releases a huge amount of energy. 	nuclear power plants produce so much energy because the process is not controlled	false
Natural gas is mostly methane. 	natural gas is useful as a fuel moreorless as it comes out of the ground	true
Natural gas is often found along with coal or oil in underground deposits. This is because natural gas forms with these other fossil fuels. One difference between natural gas and oil is that natural gas forms at higher temperatures. 	fossil fuels are compounds known as hydrocarbons	true
Coal is a black or brownish-black rock that burns easily (Figure 5.3). Most coal is sedimentary rock. The hardest type of coal, anthracite, is a metamorphic rock. That is because it is exposed to higher temperature and pressure as it forms. Coal is mostly carbon, but some other elements can be found in coal, including sulfur. 	unlike other types of coal anthracite is igneous rock	false
Coal is a solid hydrocarbon. Coal is useful as a fuel, especially for generating electricity. 	most of the coal in the united states is found in the rocky mountains	false
Fossil fuels are made from plants and animals that lived hundreds of millions of years ago. The plants and animals died. Their remains settled onto the ground and at the bottom of the sea. Layer upon layer of organic material was laid down. Eventually, the layers were buried very deeply. They experienced intense heat and pressure. Over millions of years, the organic material turned into fossil fuels. Fossil fuels are compounds of carbon and hydrogen, called hydrocarbons. Hydrocarbons can be solid, liquid, or gas. The solid form is coal. The liquid form is petroleum, or crude oil. The gaseous form is natural gas. 	petroleum formed at the bottom of ancient seas	true
The United States produces only about one-quarter as much oil as it uses. The main oil producing regions in the U.S. are the Gulf of Mexico, Texas, Alaska, and California. Geologists look for oil in folded layers of rock called anticlines. Oil moves through permeable rock and is trapped by the impermeable cap rock. 	the united states produces more oil than it uses	false
Using gasoline to power automobiles affects the environment. The exhaust fumes from burning gasoline cause air pollution. These pollutants include smog and ground-level ozone. Air pollution is a big problem for cities where large numbers of people drive every day. Burning gasoline also produces carbon dioxide. This is a greenhouse gas and is a cause of global warming. Similar pollutants come from other forms of oil. 	burning gasoline leads to smog and groundlevel ozone	true
Natural gas is mostly methane. 	natural gas is obtained from earths atmosphere	false
Coal is a solid hydrocarbon. Coal is useful as a fuel, especially for generating electricity. 	most coal contains the element sulfur	true
Nuclear energy is produced by splitting the nucleus of an atom. This releases a huge amount of energy. 	nuclear energy is a renewable energy resource	false
Nuclear power plants use uranium that has been concentrated in fuel rods (Figure 5.6). The uranium atoms are split apart when they are hit by other extremely tiny particles. These particles must be controlled or they would cause a dangerous explosion. Nuclear power plants use the energy they produce to heat water. The water turns into steam, which causes a turbine to spin. This in turn produces electricity. 	fuel rods in nuclear power plants are made of carbon	false
The energy from the Sun creates wind (Figure 5.11). Wind energy moves by convection. The Sun heats some locations more than others. Warm air rises, so other air rushes in to fill the hole left by the rising air. This horizontal movement of air is called wind. 	wind power has only been harnessed in recent years	false
Because the hot water or steam can be used directly to make a turbine spin, geothermal energy can be used without processing. Geothermal energy is clean and safe. It is renewable. There will always be hot rocks and water can be pumped down into a well. There, the water can be heated again to make more steam. Geothermal energy is an excellent resource in some parts of the world. Iceland is gets about one fourth of its electricity from geothermal sources. In the United States, California leads all states in producing geothermal energy. Geothermal energy in California is concentrated in the northern part of the state. The largest plant is in the Geysers Geothermal Resource Area. Geothermal energy is not economical everywhere. Many parts of the world do not have underground sources of heat that are close enough to the surface for building geothermal power plants. 	the largest geothermal power planet in the united states is in iceland	false
Moving water has energy (Figure 5.10). That energy is used to make electricity. Hydroelectric power harnesses the energy of water moving down a stream. Hydropower is the most widely used form of renewable energy in the world. This abundant energy source provides almost one fifth of the worlds electricity. The energy of waves and tides can also be used to produce water power. At this time, wave and tidal power are rare. 	to produce electricity a resource must somehow turn a turbine	true
Water power does not burn a fuel. So it causes less pollution than many other kinds of energy. Water power is also a renewable resource. Water keeps flowing downhill. Although we use some of the energy from this movement, we are not using up the water. Water power does have problems. A large dam stops a streams flow, which floods the land upstream. A beautiful location may be lost. People may be displaced. The dams and turbines also change the downstream environment. Fish and other living things may not be able to survive. Dams slow the release of silt. Downstream deltas retreat and beaches may be starved of sand. Seaside cities may become exposed to storms and rising sea levels. Tidal power stations may need to close off a narrow bay or estuary. Wave power plants must withstand coastal storms and the corrosion of seawater. 	the land upstream of a dam may be flooded	true
Solar energy is used to heat homes and water, and to make electricity. Scientists and engineers have many ways to get energy from the Sun (Figure 5.9). One is by using solar cells. Solar cells are devices that turn sunlight directly into electricity. Lots of solar cells make up an individual solar panel. You may have seen solar panels on roof tops. The Suns heat can also be trapped in your home by using south facing windows and good insulation. 	most of earths energy comes directly or indirectly from the sun	true
The Sun is Earths main source of energy. The Sun gives us both light and heat. The Sun changes hydrogen into helium through nuclear fusion. This releases huge amounts of energy. The energy travels to the Earth mostly as visible light. The energy is carried through the empty space by radiation. We can use sunlight as an energy resource, called solar energy (Figure 5.7). 	the sun is planet earths main source of energy	true
Solar energy has been used on a small scale for hundreds of years. Today we are using solar energy for more of our power demands. Solar power plants are being built in many locations around the world. In the United States, the southwestern deserts are well suited for solar plants. 	solar energy has been used by people only since the late 1900s	false
Solar energy has been used on a small scale for hundreds of years. Today we are using solar energy for more of our power demands. Solar power plants are being built in many locations around the world. In the United States, the southwestern deserts are well suited for solar plants. 	a solar cell consists of many solar panels	false
Solar energy has been used on a small scale for hundreds of years. Today we are using solar energy for more of our power demands. Solar power plants are being built in many locations around the world. In the United States, the southwestern deserts are well suited for solar plants. 	solar power plants use mirrors to focus sunlight	true
Solar energy has many benefits. It does not produce any pollution. There is plenty of it available, much more than we could possibly use. But solar energy has problems. The Sun doesnt shine at night. A special battery is needed to store extra energy during the day for use at night. The technology for most uses of solar energy is still expensive. Until solar technology becomes more affordable, most people will prefer to get their energy from other sources. 	the technology needed for most uses of solar energy is expensive	true
Many of the suitable streams in the United States have been developed for hydroelectric power. Many streams worldwide also have hydroelectric plants. Hydropower is a major source of Californias electricity. It accounts for about 14.5 percent of the total. Most of Californias nearly 400 hydroelectric power plants are located in the Sierra Nevada mountains. 	streams with wide valleys are best for producing hydroelectric power	false
Water power does not burn a fuel. So it causes less pollution than many other kinds of energy. Water power is also a renewable resource. Water keeps flowing downhill. Although we use some of the energy from this movement, we are not using up the water. Water power does have problems. A large dam stops a streams flow, which floods the land upstream. A beautiful location may be lost. People may be displaced. The dams and turbines also change the downstream environment. Fish and other living things may not be able to survive. Dams slow the release of silt. Downstream deltas retreat and beaches may be starved of sand. Seaside cities may become exposed to storms and rising sea levels. Tidal power stations may need to close off a narrow bay or estuary. Wave power plants must withstand coastal storms and the corrosion of seawater. 	using water power has no negative effects on the environment	false
The energy from the Sun creates wind (Figure 5.11). Wind energy moves by convection. The Sun heats some locations more than others. Warm air rises, so other air rushes in to fill the hole left by the rising air. This horizontal movement of air is called wind. 	wind turbines are inexpensive and long lasting	false
Biomass is another renewable source of energy. Biomass includes wood, grains, and other plant materials or waste materials. People can burn wood directly for energy in the form of heat. Biomass can also be processed to make biofuel. Biofuel is a fairly new type of energy that is becoming more popular. Biomass is useful because it can be made liquid. This means that they can be used in cars and trucks. Some car engines can be powered by pure vegetable oil or even recycled vegetable oil. Sometimes the exhaust from these cars smells like French fries! By using biofuels, we can cut down on the amount of fossil fuel that we use. Because living plants take carbon dioxide out of the air, growing plants for biofuel can mean that we will put less of this gas into the air overall. This could help us do something about the problem of global warming. 	some car engines can run on pure vegetable oil	true
Where Earths internal heat gets close to the surface, geothermal power is a clean source of energy. In California, The Geysers supplies energy for many nearby homes and businesses. Learn more at: http://science.kqed.org/ques MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	geothermal energy can be used without processing	true
Solar energy has been used on a small scale for hundreds of years. Today we are using solar energy for more of our power demands. Solar power plants are being built in many locations around the world. In the United States, the southwestern deserts are well suited for solar plants. 	fuel made from plants	1.c
Solar energy is used to heat homes and water, and to make electricity. Scientists and engineers have many ways to get energy from the Sun (Figure 5.9). One is by using solar cells. Solar cells are devices that turn sunlight directly into electricity. Lots of solar cells make up an individual solar panel. You may have seen solar panels on roof tops. The Suns heat can also be trapped in your home by using south facing windows and good insulation. 	device that changes sunlight directly to electricity	2.g
Sunlight is turned into electricity at a solar power plant. These power plants use a large group of mirrors to focus sunlight on one place. This place is called a receiver (Figure 5.8). At the receiver, a liquid such as oil or water is heated to a high temperature. The liquid transfers its heat by conduction. In conduction, energy moves between two objects that are in contact. The higher temperature object transfers heat to the lower temperature object. For example, when you heat a pot of water on a stove top, energy moves from the pot to its metal handle by conduction. At a solar power plant, the energy conducted by the heated liquid is used to make electricity. 	transfer of energy between two objects that are in contact	3.a
Solar energy has been used on a small scale for hundreds of years. Today we are using solar energy for more of our power demands. Solar power plants are being built in many locations around the world. In the United States, the southwestern deserts are well suited for solar plants. 	transfer of energy through a liquid by currents	4.d
Moving water has energy (Figure 5.10). That energy is used to make electricity. Hydroelectric power harnesses the energy of water moving down a stream. Hydropower is the most widely used form of renewable energy in the world. This abundant energy source provides almost one fifth of the worlds electricity. The energy of waves and tides can also be used to produce water power. At this time, wave and tidal power are rare. 	source of the suns energy	5.b
Moving water has energy (Figure 5.10). That energy is used to make electricity. Hydroelectric power harnesses the energy of water moving down a stream. Hydropower is the most widely used form of renewable energy in the world. This abundant energy source provides almost one fifth of the worlds electricity. The energy of waves and tides can also be used to produce water power. At this time, wave and tidal power are rare. 	transfer of energy by waves that can travel through matter or across space	6.f
To harness water power, a stream must be dammed. Narrow valleys are the best for dams. While sitting in the reservoir behind the dam, the water has potential energy. Water is allowed to flow downhill into a large turbine. While flowing downhill, the water has kinetic energy. Kinetic energy makes the turbine spin. The turbine is connected to a generator, which makes electricity. 	electricity produced by harnessing the energy of flowing water	7.e
Some important evidence for continental drift came after Wegeners death. This is the magnetic evidence. Earths magnetic field surrounds the planet from pole to pole. If you have ever been hiking or camping, you may have used a compass to help you find your way. A compass points to the magnetic North Pole. The compass needle aligns with Earths magnetic field (Figure 6.8). Some rocks contain little compasses too! As lava cools, tiny iron-rich crystals line up with Earths magnetic field. 	region of magnetic force surrounding a magnet	1.f
Wegener and his supporters collected a great deal of evidence for the continental drift hypothesis. Wegener found that this evidence was best explained if the continents had at one time been joined together. 	evidence for continental drift identified after wegeners death	2.c
Wegener and his supporters collected a great deal of evidence for the continental drift hypothesis. Wegener found that this evidence was best explained if the continents had at one time been joined together. 	hypothesis that continents move over earths surface	3.d
Wegener and his supporters collected a great deal of evidence for the continental drift hypothesis. Wegener found that this evidence was best explained if the continents had at one time been joined together. 	evidence for continental drift identified by wegener	4.b
Wegener and his supporters collected a great deal of evidence for the continental drift hypothesis. Wegener found that this evidence was best explained if the continents had at one time been joined together. 	similar fossil records across continents was evidence for continental drift	true
Alfred Wegener was an early 20th century German meteorologist. Wegener believed that the continents were once all joined together. He named the supercontinent Pangaea, meaning all earth. Wegener suggested that Pangaea broke up long ago. Since then, the continents have been moving to their current positions. He called his hypothesis continental drift. 	former supercontinent that consisted of all the present continents	5.e
Some important evidence for continental drift came after Wegeners death. This is the magnetic evidence. Earths magnetic field surrounds the planet from pole to pole. If you have ever been hiking or camping, you may have used a compass to help you find your way. A compass points to the magnetic North Pole. The compass needle aligns with Earths magnetic field (Figure 6.8). Some rocks contain little compasses too! As lava cools, tiny iron-rich crystals line up with Earths magnetic field. 	the magnetic north pole and geographic north pole are in the same location	false
Wegener and his supporters collected a great deal of evidence for the continental drift hypothesis. Wegener found that this evidence was best explained if the continents had at one time been joined together. 	theory that explains how continents can drift	6.a
Coral reefs are found only in warm water. Coal swamps are also found in tropical and subtropical environments. Wegener discovered ancient coal seams and coral reef fossils in areas that are much too cold today. Wegener thought that the continents have moved since the time of Pangaea. 	if an ancient coral reef is found in the arctic it means that the continent it is on has drifted	true
Wegener and his supporters collected a great deal of evidence for the continental drift hypothesis. Wegener found that this evidence was best explained if the continents had at one time been joined together. 	the continents have never all been together as a single whole continent	false
Wegener and his supporters collected a great deal of evidence for the continental drift hypothesis. Wegener found that this evidence was best explained if the continents had at one time been joined together. 	the locations of ancient climate zones provide evidence for continental drift	true
Wegener and his supporters collected a great deal of evidence for the continental drift hypothesis. Wegener found that this evidence was best explained if the continents had at one time been joined together. 	the theory of plate tectonics was developed before the idea of continental drift	false
Wegener and his supporters collected a great deal of evidence for the continental drift hypothesis. Wegener found that this evidence was best explained if the continents had at one time been joined together. 	wegener believed that all the continents were once joined together	true
Wegener and his supporters collected a great deal of evidence for the continental drift hypothesis. Wegener found that this evidence was best explained if the continents had at one time been joined together. 	wegeners hypothesis of continental drift was widely accepted as soon as it was introduced	false
Wegener and his supporters collected a great deal of evidence for the continental drift hypothesis. Wegener found that this evidence was best explained if the continents had at one time been joined together. 	wegener and his supporters provided a lot of evidence for continental drift	true
Wegener found rocks of the same type and age on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean. He thought that the rocks formed side by side. These rocks then drifted apart on separate continents. Wegener also matched up mountain ranges across the Atlantic Ocean. The Appalachian Mountains were just like mountain ranges in eastern Greenland, Ireland, Great Britain, and Norway. Wegener concluded that they formed as a single mountain range. This mountain range broke apart as the continents split up. The mountain range separated as the continents drifted. 	wegener found rocks of the same type and age on both sides of the atlantic ocean	true
Alfred Wegener was an early 20th century German meteorologist. Wegener believed that the continents were once all joined together. He named the supercontinent Pangaea, meaning all earth. Wegener suggested that Pangaea broke up long ago. Since then, the continents have been moving to their current positions. He called his hypothesis continental drift. 	wegener suggested that pangaea broke up a short time ago	false
Wegener and his supporters collected a great deal of evidence for the continental drift hypothesis. Wegener found that this evidence was best explained if the continents had at one time been joined together. 	wegener developed a theory to explain how continents can drift	false
Sedimentary rocks are formed in horizontal layers. This is magnificently displayed around the southwestern United States. The arid climate allows rock layers to be well exposed (Figure 7.4). The lowest layers are the oldest and the higher layers are younger. Folds, joints and faults are caused by stresses. Figure 7.5 shows joints in a granite hillside. If a sedimentary rock is tilted or folded, we know that stresses have changed the rock (Figure 7.6). 	if very old rocks are above much younger rocks there may be a thrust fault in between	true
Sedimentary rocks are formed in horizontal layers. This is magnificently displayed around the southwestern United States. The arid climate allows rock layers to be well exposed (Figure 7.4). The lowest layers are the oldest and the higher layers are younger. Folds, joints and faults are caused by stresses. Figure 7.5 shows joints in a granite hillside. If a sedimentary rock is tilted or folded, we know that stresses have changed the rock (Figure 7.6). 	a deeply buried rock is under compressive stresses	true
Sedimentary rocks are formed in horizontal layers. This is magnificently displayed around the southwestern United States. The arid climate allows rock layers to be well exposed (Figure 7.4). The lowest layers are the oldest and the higher layers are younger. Folds, joints and faults are caused by stresses. Figure 7.5 shows joints in a granite hillside. If a sedimentary rock is tilted or folded, we know that stresses have changed the rock (Figure 7.6). 	the terrain known as basinandrange is caused by compressive forces	false
With enough stress, a rock will fracture, or break. The fracture is called a joint if the rock breaks but doesnt move, as shown in Figure 7.10. If the rocks on one or both sides of a fracture move, the fracture is called a fault (Figure 7.11). Faults can occur alone or in clusters, creating a fault zone. Earthquakes happen when rocks break and move suddenly. The energy released causes an earthquake. Slip is the distance rocks move along a fault, as one block of rock moves past the other. The angle of a fault is called When compression squeezes the crust into a smaller space, the hanging wall pushes up relative to the footwall. This creates a reverse fault. A thrust fault is a type of reverse fault where the angle is nearly horizontal. Rocks can slip many miles along thrust faults (Figure 7.13). 	the amount the ground moves in an earthquake is called slip	true
A strike-slip fault is a dip-slip fault where the dip of the fault plane is vertical. Strike-slip faults result from shear stresses. If you stand with one foot on each side of a strike-slip fault, one side will be moving toward you while the other side moves away from you. If your right foot moves toward you, the fault is known as a right-lateral strike-slip fault. If your left foot moves toward you, the fault is a left-lateral strike-slip fault (Figure 7.14). 	in a strikeslip fault the dip of the fault plane is vertical	true
Stress is the force applied to a rock. There are four types of stresses: Confining stress happens as weight of all the overlying rock pushes down on a deeply buried rock. The rock is being pushed in from all sides, which compresses it. The rock will not deform because there is no place for it to move. Compression stress squeezes rocks together. Compression causes rocks to fold or fracture (Figure 7.1). When two cars collide, compression causes them to crumple. Compression is the most common stress at convergent plate boundaries. Tension stress pulls rocks apart. Tension causes rocks to lengthen or break apart. Tension is the major type of stress found at divergent plate boundaries. Shear stress happens when forces slide past each other in opposite directions (Figure 7.2). This is the most common stress found at transform plate boundaries. The amount of stress on a rock may be greater than the rocks strength. In that case, the rock will change and deform (Figure 7.3). Deep within the Earth, the pressure is very great. A rock behaves like a stretched rubber band. When the stress stops, the rock goes back to its original shape. If more stress is applied to the rock, it bends and flows. It does not return to its original shape. Near the surface, if the stress continues, the rock will fracture and break. 	any force applied to rock is a stress	true
Stress is the force applied to a rock. There are four types of stresses: Confining stress happens as weight of all the overlying rock pushes down on a deeply buried rock. The rock is being pushed in from all sides, which compresses it. The rock will not deform because there is no place for it to move. Compression stress squeezes rocks together. Compression causes rocks to fold or fracture (Figure 7.1). When two cars collide, compression causes them to crumple. Compression is the most common stress at convergent plate boundaries. Tension stress pulls rocks apart. Tension causes rocks to lengthen or break apart. Tension is the major type of stress found at divergent plate boundaries. Shear stress happens when forces slide past each other in opposite directions (Figure 7.2). This is the most common stress found at transform plate boundaries. The amount of stress on a rock may be greater than the rocks strength. In that case, the rock will change and deform (Figure 7.3). Deep within the Earth, the pressure is very great. A rock behaves like a stretched rubber band. When the stress stops, the rock goes back to its original shape. If more stress is applied to the rock, it bends and flows. It does not return to its original shape. Near the surface, if the stress continues, the rock will fracture and break. 	when confining stress occurs rock deforms	false
Stress is the force applied to a rock. There are four types of stresses: Confining stress happens as weight of all the overlying rock pushes down on a deeply buried rock. The rock is being pushed in from all sides, which compresses it. The rock will not deform because there is no place for it to move. Compression stress squeezes rocks together. Compression causes rocks to fold or fracture (Figure 7.1). When two cars collide, compression causes them to crumple. Compression is the most common stress at convergent plate boundaries. Tension stress pulls rocks apart. Tension causes rocks to lengthen or break apart. Tension is the major type of stress found at divergent plate boundaries. Shear stress happens when forces slide past each other in opposite directions (Figure 7.2). This is the most common stress found at transform plate boundaries. The amount of stress on a rock may be greater than the rocks strength. In that case, the rock will change and deform (Figure 7.3). Deep within the Earth, the pressure is very great. A rock behaves like a stretched rubber band. When the stress stops, the rock goes back to its original shape. If more stress is applied to the rock, it bends and flows. It does not return to its original shape. Near the surface, if the stress continues, the rock will fracture and break. 	compression is the most common stress at convergent plates	true
Sedimentary rocks are formed in horizontal layers. This is magnificently displayed around the southwestern United States. The arid climate allows rock layers to be well exposed (Figure 7.4). The lowest layers are the oldest and the higher layers are younger. Folds, joints and faults are caused by stresses. Figure 7.5 shows joints in a granite hillside. If a sedimentary rock is tilted or folded, we know that stresses have changed the rock (Figure 7.6). 	stress is the cause of joints in rock	true
Deep within the Earth, as plates collide, rocks crumple into folds. You can model these folds by placing your hands on opposite edges of a piece of cloth and pushing your hands together. In sedimentary rocks, you can easily trace the folding of the layers. In the Figure 7.6, the rock layers are no longer horizontal. They tilt downhill from right to left in a monocline. Once rocks are folded, they do not return to their original shape. There are three types of folds: monoclines, anticlines, and synclines. A monocline is a simple one step bend in the rock layers (Figure 7.7). In a monocline, the oldest rocks are still at the bottom and the youngest are at the top. An anticline is a fold that arches upward. The rocks dip away from the center of the fold (Figure 7.8). The oldest rocks are found at the center of an anticline. The youngest rocks are draped over them at the top of the structure. When upward folding rocks form a circular structure, that structure is called a dome. If the top of the dome is eroded off, the oldest rocks are exposed at the center. A syncline is a fold that bends downward (Figure 7.9). In a syncline, the youngest rocks are at the center. The oldest rocks are at the outside edges. When rocks bend downward in a circular structure, it is called a basin. If the rocks are eroded, the youngest rocks are at the center. Basins can be enormous, like the Michigan Basin. 	a syncline is a fold that arches upward	false
A strike-slip fault is a dip-slip fault where the dip of the fault plane is vertical. Strike-slip faults result from shear stresses. If you stand with one foot on each side of a strike-slip fault, one side will be moving toward you while the other side moves away from you. If your right foot moves toward you, the fault is known as a right-lateral strike-slip fault. If your left foot moves toward you, the fault is a left-lateral strike-slip fault (Figure 7.14). 	an area where faults are clustered is called a fault zone	true
Sedimentary rocks are formed in horizontal layers. This is magnificently displayed around the southwestern United States. The arid climate allows rock layers to be well exposed (Figure 7.4). The lowest layers are the oldest and the higher layers are younger. Folds, joints and faults are caused by stresses. Figure 7.5 shows joints in a granite hillside. If a sedimentary rock is tilted or folded, we know that stresses have changed the rock (Figure 7.6). 	movement of rock at faults is the cause of earthquakes	true
Sedimentary rocks are formed in horizontal layers. This is magnificently displayed around the southwestern United States. The arid climate allows rock layers to be well exposed (Figure 7.4). The lowest layers are the oldest and the higher layers are younger. Folds, joints and faults are caused by stresses. Figure 7.5 shows joints in a granite hillside. If a sedimentary rock is tilted or folded, we know that stresses have changed the rock (Figure 7.6). 	normal faults are caused by compression stress	false
A strike-slip fault is a dip-slip fault where the dip of the fault plane is vertical. Strike-slip faults result from shear stresses. If you stand with one foot on each side of a strike-slip fault, one side will be moving toward you while the other side moves away from you. If your right foot moves toward you, the fault is known as a right-lateral strike-slip fault. If your left foot moves toward you, the fault is a left-lateral strike-slip fault (Figure 7.14). 	strikeslip faults result from shear stress	true
Volcanic mountain ranges form when oceanic crust is pushed down into the mantle at convergent plate boundaries. The Andes Mountains are a chain of coastal volcanic mountains. They are forming as the Nazca plate subducts beneath the South American plate (Figure 7.18). 	only the process of folding creates mountain ranges	false
With enough stress, a rock will fracture, or break. The fracture is called a joint if the rock breaks but doesnt move, as shown in Figure 7.10. If the rocks on one or both sides of a fracture move, the fracture is called a fault (Figure 7.11). Faults can occur alone or in clusters, creating a fault zone. Earthquakes happen when rocks break and move suddenly. The energy released causes an earthquake. Slip is the distance rocks move along a fault, as one block of rock moves past the other. The angle of a fault is called When compression squeezes the crust into a smaller space, the hanging wall pushes up relative to the footwall. This creates a reverse fault. A thrust fault is a type of reverse fault where the angle is nearly horizontal. Rocks can slip many miles along thrust faults (Figure 7.13). 	fault in which the hanging wall drops down relative to the footwall	1.b
A strike-slip fault is a dip-slip fault where the dip of the fault plane is vertical. Strike-slip faults result from shear stresses. If you stand with one foot on each side of a strike-slip fault, one side will be moving toward you while the other side moves away from you. If your right foot moves toward you, the fault is known as a right-lateral strike-slip fault. If your left foot moves toward you, the fault is a left-lateral strike-slip fault (Figure 7.14). 	block of rock that is beneath a dipslip fault plane	2.g
With enough stress, a rock will fracture, or break. The fracture is called a joint if the rock breaks but doesnt move, as shown in Figure 7.10. If the rocks on one or both sides of a fracture move, the fracture is called a fault (Figure 7.11). Faults can occur alone or in clusters, creating a fault zone. Earthquakes happen when rocks break and move suddenly. The energy released causes an earthquake. Slip is the distance rocks move along a fault, as one block of rock moves past the other. The angle of a fault is called When compression squeezes the crust into a smaller space, the hanging wall pushes up relative to the footwall. This creates a reverse fault. A thrust fault is a type of reverse fault where the angle is nearly horizontal. Rocks can slip many miles along thrust faults (Figure 7.13). 	fault in which the hanging wall pushes up relative to the footwall	3.c
A strike-slip fault is a dip-slip fault where the dip of the fault plane is vertical. Strike-slip faults result from shear stresses. If you stand with one foot on each side of a strike-slip fault, one side will be moving toward you while the other side moves away from you. If your right foot moves toward you, the fault is known as a right-lateral strike-slip fault. If your left foot moves toward you, the fault is a left-lateral strike-slip fault (Figure 7.14). 	block of rock that is above a dipslip fault plane	4.f
A strike-slip fault is a dip-slip fault where the dip of the fault plane is vertical. Strike-slip faults result from shear stresses. If you stand with one foot on each side of a strike-slip fault, one side will be moving toward you while the other side moves away from you. If your right foot moves toward you, the fault is known as a right-lateral strike-slip fault. If your left foot moves toward you, the fault is a left-lateral strike-slip fault (Figure 7.14). 	fault with a fault plane that is not vertical	5. a
A strike-slip fault is a dip-slip fault where the dip of the fault plane is vertical. Strike-slip faults result from shear stresses. If you stand with one foot on each side of a strike-slip fault, one side will be moving toward you while the other side moves away from you. If your right foot moves toward you, the fault is known as a right-lateral strike-slip fault. If your left foot moves toward you, the fault is a left-lateral strike-slip fault (Figure 7.14). 	fault with a vertical fault plane	6. d
A strike-slip fault is a dip-slip fault where the dip of the fault plane is vertical. Strike-slip faults result from shear stresses. If you stand with one foot on each side of a strike-slip fault, one side will be moving toward you while the other side moves away from you. If your right foot moves toward you, the fault is known as a right-lateral strike-slip fault. If your left foot moves toward you, the fault is a left-lateral strike-slip fault (Figure 7.14). 	reverse fault in which the fault plane is nearly horizontal	7. e
When hot water gently rises to the surface, it creates a hot spring. A hot spring forms where a crack in the Earth allows water to reach the surface after being heated underground. Many hot springs are used by people as natural hot tubs. Some people believe that hot springs can cure illnesses. Hot springs are found all over the world, even in Antarctica! 	hot water that seeps out of a crack at the surface	1.e
When lava is thick, it flows slowly. If thick lava makes it to the surface, it cannot flow far from the vent. It often stays right in the middle of a crater at the top of a volcano. Here the lava creates a large, round lava dome (Figure 	igneous rock formation that results when lava cools in the middle of a volcanic crater	2.c
Water works its way through porous rocks or soil. Sometimes this water is heated by nearby magma. If the water makes its way to the surface, it forms a hot spring or a geyser. 	hot water under pressure that forcefully erupts out of the surface	3.f
Magma that cools underground forms intrusions (Figure 8.22). Intrusions become land formations if they are exposed at the surface by erosion. 	type of igneous rock that forms when magma cools below earths surface	4.b
Magma that cools underground forms intrusions (Figure 8.22). Intrusions become land formations if they are exposed at the surface by erosion. 	type of igneous rock that forms when lava cools on earths surface	5.a
A lava plateau is made of a large amount of fluid lava. The lava flows over a large area and cools. This creates a large, flat surface of igneous rock. Lava plateaus may be huge. The Columbia Plateau covers over 161,000 square kilometers (63,000 square miles). It makes up parts of the states of Washington, Oregon, and Idaho. Thin, fluid lava created the rock that makes up the entire ocean floor. This is from multiple eruptions from vents at the mid-ocean ridge. While not exactly a lava plateau, its interesting to think about so much lava! 	flat surface of igneous rock that forms when thin lava flows over a large area	6.d
Extrusive igneous rocks cool at the surface. Volcanoes are one type of feature that forms from extrusive rocks. Several other interesting landforms are also extrusive features. Intrusive igneous rocks cool below the surface. These rocks do not always remain hidden. Rocks that formed in the crust are exposed when the rock and sediment that covers them is eroded away. 	intrusive igneous rocks are never visible on earths surface	false
When lava is thick, it flows slowly. If thick lava makes it to the surface, it cannot flow far from the vent. It often stays right in the middle of a crater at the top of a volcano. Here the lava creates a large, round lava dome (Figure 	a lava dome is any mountain that forms from lava	false
When lava is thick, it flows slowly. If thick lava makes it to the surface, it cannot flow far from the vent. It often stays right in the middle of a crater at the top of a volcano. Here the lava creates a large, round lava dome (Figure 	the lava that forms a lava dome is thin and runny	false
When lava is thick, it flows slowly. If thick lava makes it to the surface, it cannot flow far from the vent. It often stays right in the middle of a crater at the top of a volcano. Here the lava creates a large, round lava dome (Figure 	a lava plateau forms when a volcano produces very little lava	false
New land is created in volcanic eruptions. The Hawaiian Islands are shield volcanoes. These volcanoes formed from fluid lava (Figure 8.21). The island grows as lava is added on the coast. New land may also emerge from lava that erupts from beneath the water. This is one way that new land is created. 	lava from shield volcanoes created the hawaiian islands	true
Magma that cools underground forms intrusions (Figure 8.22). Intrusions become land formations if they are exposed at the surface by erosion. 	intrusions form on the surface and later are buried by sediments	false
Water works its way through porous rocks or soil. Sometimes this water is heated by nearby magma. If the water makes its way to the surface, it forms a hot spring or a geyser. 	the water in hot springs is heated by magma	true
Mechanical weathering increases the rate of chemical weathering. As rock breaks into smaller pieces, the surface area of the pieces increases. With more surfaces exposed, there are more places for chemical weathering to occur. Lets say you wanted to make some hot chocolate on a cold day. It would be hard to get a big chunk of chocolate to dissolve in your milk or hot water. Maybe you could make hot chocolate from some smaller pieces like chocolate chips, but it is much easier to add a powder to your milk. This is because the smaller the pieces are, the more surface area they have. Smaller pieces dissolve more easily. 	agent of chemical weathering	1. b
Weathering changes solid rock into sediments. Sediments are different sizes of rock particles. Boulders are sedi- ments; so is gravel. At the other end, silt and clay are also sediments. Weathering causes rocks at the Earths surface to change form. The new minerals that form are stable at the Earths surface. It takes a long time for a rock or mountain to weather. But a road can do so much more quickly. If you live in a part of the world that has cold winters, you may only have to wait one year to see a new road start to weather (Figure 	weathering process that occurs when water freezes in cracks in rocks	2.g
Weathering changes solid rock into sediments. Sediments are different sizes of rock particles. Boulders are sedi- ments; so is gravel. At the other end, silt and clay are also sediments. Weathering causes rocks at the Earths surface to change form. The new minerals that form are stable at the Earths surface. It takes a long time for a rock or mountain to weather. But a road can do so much more quickly. If you live in a part of the world that has cold winters, you may only have to wait one year to see a new road start to weather (Figure 	weathering process that occurs when rocks and rock particles scrape other rocks	3.c
Chemical weathering is different than mechanical weathering. The minerals in the rock change. The rock changes composition and becomes a different type of rock. Most minerals form at high pressure or high temperatures deep within Earth. But at Earths surface, temperatures and pressures are much lower. Minerals that were stable deeper in the crust are not stable at the surface. Thats why chemical weathering happens. Minerals that formed at higher temperature and pressure change into minerals that are stable at the surface. Chemical weathering is important. It starts the process of changing solid rock into soil. We need soil to grow food and create other materials we need. Chemical weathering works through chemical reactions that change the rock. There are many agents of chemical weathering. Remember that water was a main agent of mechanical weathering. Well, water is also an agent of chemical weathering. That makes it a double agent! Carbon dioxide and oxygen are also agents of chemical weathering. Each of these is discussed below. 	important agents of chemical weathering include oxygen carbon dioxide and sulfur	true
Mechanical weathering breaks rock into smaller pieces. These smaller pieces are just like the bigger rock; they are just smaller! The rock has broken without changing its composition. The smaller pieces have the same minerals in the same proportions. You could use the expression a chip off the old block to describe mechanical weathering! The main agents of mechanical weathering are water, ice, and wind. 	rock particle created by weathering	4.e
Mechanical weathering increases the rate of chemical weathering. As rock breaks into smaller pieces, the surface area of the pieces increases. With more surfaces exposed, there are more places for chemical weathering to occur. Lets say you wanted to make some hot chocolate on a cold day. It would be hard to get a big chunk of chocolate to dissolve in your milk or hot water. Maybe you could make hot chocolate from some smaller pieces like chocolate chips, but it is much easier to add a powder to your milk. This is because the smaller the pieces are, the more surface area they have. Smaller pieces dissolve more easily. 	if temperature increases by 10c the rate of chemical reactions will double	true
Mechanical weathering breaks rock into smaller pieces. These smaller pieces are just like the bigger rock; they are just smaller! The rock has broken without changing its composition. The smaller pieces have the same minerals in the same proportions. You could use the expression a chip off the old block to describe mechanical weathering! The main agents of mechanical weathering are water, ice, and wind. 	type of weathering that breaks rock into smaller pieces	5.d
Weathering changes solid rock into sediments. Sediments are different sizes of rock particles. Boulders are sedi- ments; so is gravel. At the other end, silt and clay are also sediments. Weathering causes rocks at the Earths surface to change form. The new minerals that form are stable at the Earths surface. It takes a long time for a rock or mountain to weather. But a road can do so much more quickly. If you live in a part of the world that has cold winters, you may only have to wait one year to see a new road start to weather (Figure 	movement of weathered rock particles	6.f
Weathering changes solid rock into sediments. Sediments are different sizes of rock particles. Boulders are sedi- ments; so is gravel. At the other end, silt and clay are also sediments. Weathering causes rocks at the Earths surface to change form. The new minerals that form are stable at the Earths surface. It takes a long time for a rock or mountain to weather. But a road can do so much more quickly. If you live in a part of the world that has cold winters, you may only have to wait one year to see a new road start to weather (Figure 	all rocks weather at the same rate	false
Mechanical weathering breaks rock into smaller pieces. These smaller pieces are just like the bigger rock; they are just smaller! The rock has broken without changing its composition. The smaller pieces have the same minerals in the same proportions. You could use the expression a chip off the old block to describe mechanical weathering! The main agents of mechanical weathering are water, ice, and wind. 	type of weathering that changes the minerals in rock	7.a
Abrasion is another type of mechanical weathering. With abrasion, one rock bumps against another rock. Gravity causes abrasion as a rock tumbles down a slope. Moving water causes abrasion it moves rocks so that they bump against one another (Figure 9.3). Strong winds cause abrasion by blasting sand against rock surfaces. Finally, the ice in glaciers cause abrasion. Pieces of rock embedded in ice at the bottom of a glacier scrape against the rock below. If you have ever collected beach glass or pebbles from a stream, you have witnessed the work of abrasion. 	abrasion is a type of chemical weathering	false
Water is an amazing molecule. It has a very simple chemical formula, H2 O. It is made of just two hydrogen atoms bonded to one oxygen atom. Water is remarkable in terms of all the things it can do. Lots of things dissolve easily in water. Some types of rock can even completely dissolve in water! Other minerals change by adding water into their structure. 	water can dissolve salt	true
Mechanical weathering breaks rock into smaller pieces. These smaller pieces are just like the bigger rock; they are just smaller! The rock has broken without changing its composition. The smaller pieces have the same minerals in the same proportions. You could use the expression a chip off the old block to describe mechanical weathering! The main agents of mechanical weathering are water, ice, and wind. 	natural weathering is usually a very slow process	true
Weathering changes solid rock into sediments. Sediments are different sizes of rock particles. Boulders are sedi- ments; so is gravel. At the other end, silt and clay are also sediments. Weathering causes rocks at the Earths surface to change form. The new minerals that form are stable at the Earths surface. It takes a long time for a rock or mountain to weather. But a road can do so much more quickly. If you live in a part of the world that has cold winters, you may only have to wait one year to see a new road start to weather (Figure 	grains of sands are weathered particles of rock	true
Mechanical weathering breaks rock into smaller pieces. These smaller pieces are just like the bigger rock; they are just smaller! The rock has broken without changing its composition. The smaller pieces have the same minerals in the same proportions. You could use the expression a chip off the old block to describe mechanical weathering! The main agents of mechanical weathering are water, ice, and wind. 	agents of mechanical weathering include wind and gravity	true
Rocks can break apart into smaller pieces in many ways. Ice wedging is common where water goes above and below its freezing point (Figure 9.2). This can happen in winter in the mid-latitudes or in colder climates in summer. Ice wedging is common in mountainous regions. This is how ice wedging works. When liquid water changes into solid ice, it increases in volume. You see this when you fill an ice cube tray with water and put it in the freezer. The ice cubes go to a higher level in the tray than the water. You also may have seen this if you put a can of soda into the freezer so that it cools down quickly. If you leave the can in the freezer too long, the liquid expands so much that it bends or pops the can. (For the record, water is very unusual. Most substances get smaller when they change from a liquid to a solid.) 	ice wedging occurs only in extremely cold climates	false
Abrasion is another type of mechanical weathering. With abrasion, one rock bumps against another rock. Gravity causes abrasion as a rock tumbles down a slope. Moving water causes abrasion it moves rocks so that they bump against one another (Figure 9.3). Strong winds cause abrasion by blasting sand against rock surfaces. Finally, the ice in glaciers cause abrasion. Pieces of rock embedded in ice at the bottom of a glacier scrape against the rock below. If you have ever collected beach glass or pebbles from a stream, you have witnessed the work of abrasion. 	pebbles in a stream are worn smooth by abrasion	true
Sometimes biological elements cause mechanical weathering. This can happen slowly. A plants roots grow into a crack in rock. As the roots grow larger, they wedge open the crack. Burrowing animals can also cause weathering. By digging for food or creating a hole to live in the animal may break apart rock. Today, human beings do a lot of mechanical weathering whenever we dig or blast into rock. This is common when we build homes, roads, and subways, or quarry stone for construction or other uses. 	burrowing animals cause mechanical weathering	true
Each type of rock weathers in its own way. Certain types of rock are very resistant to weathering. Igneous rocks tend to weather slowly because they are hard. Water cannot easily penetrate them. Granite is a very stable igneous rock. Other types of rock are easily weathered because they dissolve easily in weak acids. Limestone is a sedimentary rock that dissolves easily. When softer rocks wear away, the more resistant rocks form ridges or hills. Devils Tower in Wyoming shows how different types of rock weather at different rates (Figure 9.5). The softer materials of the surrounding rocks were worn away. The resistant center of the volcano remains behind. Minerals also weather differently. Some minerals completely dissolve in water. As less resistant minerals dissolve away, a rocks surface becomes pitted and rough. When a less resistant mineral dissolves, more resistant mineral grains are released from the rock. 	only acids can dissolve rocks	false
Carbon dioxide (CO2 ) combines with water as raindrops fall through the air. This makes a weak acid, called carbonic acid. This happens so often that carbonic acid is a common, weak acid found in nature. This acid works to dissolve rock. It eats away at sculptures and monuments. While this is normal, more acids are made when we add pollutants to the air. Any time we burn any fossil fuel, it adds nitrous oxide to the air. When we burn coal rich in sulfur, it adds sulfur dioxide to the air. As nitrous oxide and sulfur dioxide react with water, they form nitric acid and sulfuric acid. These are the two main components of acid rain. Acid rain accelerates chemical weathering. 	carbon dioxide makes a weak acid when it combines with oxygen in the air	false
Mechanical weathering increases the rate of chemical weathering. As rock breaks into smaller pieces, the surface area of the pieces increases. With more surfaces exposed, there are more places for chemical weathering to occur. Lets say you wanted to make some hot chocolate on a cold day. It would be hard to get a big chunk of chocolate to dissolve in your milk or hot water. Maybe you could make hot chocolate from some smaller pieces like chocolate chips, but it is much easier to add a powder to your milk. This is because the smaller the pieces are, the more surface area they have. Smaller pieces dissolve more easily. 	water is an agent of both mechanical and chemical weathering	true
Weathering changes solid rock into sediments. Sediments are different sizes of rock particles. Boulders are sedi- ments; so is gravel. At the other end, silt and clay are also sediments. Weathering causes rocks at the Earths surface to change form. The new minerals that form are stable at the Earths surface. It takes a long time for a rock or mountain to weather. But a road can do so much more quickly. If you live in a part of the world that has cold winters, you may only have to wait one year to see a new road start to weather (Figure 	all rocks weather at the same rate	false
Acid rain is caused by sulfur and nitrogen oxides emanating from power plants or metal refineries. The smokestacks have been built tall so that pollutants dont sit over cities (Figure 1.1). As they move, these pollutants combine with water vapor to form sulfuric and nitric acids. The acid droplets form acid fog, rain, snow, or they may be deposited dry. Most typical is acid rain (Figure 1.2). 	pollutants emitted from tall smokestacks cause problems because they can create acid rain far from where they were released in other states or nations	true
Acid rain is caused by sulfur and nitrogen oxides emanating from power plants or metal refineries. The smokestacks have been built tall so that pollutants dont sit over cities (Figure 1.1). As they move, these pollutants combine with water vapor to form sulfuric and nitric acids. The acid droplets form acid fog, rain, snow, or they may be deposited dry. Most typical is acid rain (Figure 1.2). 	a big problem crops up when acid rain falls in countries that did not produce it	true
Acid rain is caused by sulfur and nitrogen oxides emanating from power plants or metal refineries. The smokestacks have been built tall so that pollutants dont sit over cities (Figure 1.1). As they move, these pollutants combine with water vapor to form sulfuric and nitric acids. The acid droplets form acid fog, rain, snow, or they may be deposited dry. Most typical is acid rain (Figure 1.2). 	arid regions do not get enough rain to have problems with acid rain	false
Many changes in the genetic makeup of a species may accumulate over time, especially if the environment is changing. Eventually the descendants will be very different from their ancestors and may become a whole new species. Changes in the genetic makeup of a species over time are known as biological evolution. 	changes in genetic makeup of species over time is known as biological evolution	true
The mechanism for evolution is natural selection. Traits become more or less common in a population depending on whether they are beneficial or harmful. An example of evolution by natural selection can be found in the deer mouse, species Peromyscus maniculatus. In Nebraska this mouse is typically brown, but after glaciers carried lighter sand over the darker soil in the Sand Hills, predators could more easily spot the dark mice. Natural selection favored the light mice, and over time, the population became light colored. An explanation of how adaptations de- velop. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the mechanism for evolution is natural selection	true
Many changes in the genetic makeup of a species may accumulate over time, especially if the environment is changing. Eventually the descendants will be very different from their ancestors and may become a whole new species. Changes in the genetic makeup of a species over time are known as biological evolution. 	all the genetic variation that a population will have exists within it	false
Radioactivity turned out to be useful for dating Earth materials and for coming up with a quantitative age for Earth. Scientists not only date ancient rocks from Earths crust, they also date meteorites that formed at the same time Earth and the rest of the solar system were forming. Moon rocks also have been radiometrically dated. Using a combination of radiometric dating, index fossils, and superposition, geologists have constructed a well- defined timeline of Earth history. With information gathered from all over the world, estimates of rock and fossil ages have become increasingly accurate. This is the modern geologic time scale with all of the ages. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	scientists can determine an exact number for the age of earth materials using radioactivity	true
Radioactivity turned out to be useful for dating Earth materials and for coming up with a quantitative age for Earth. Scientists not only date ancient rocks from Earths crust, they also date meteorites that formed at the same time Earth and the rest of the solar system were forming. Moon rocks also have been radiometrically dated. Using a combination of radiometric dating, index fossils, and superposition, geologists have constructed a well- defined timeline of Earth history. With information gathered from all over the world, estimates of rock and fossil ages have become increasingly accurate. This is the modern geologic time scale with all of the ages. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	geologists have pieced together earth history using all of the scientific tools available to them	true
Radioactivity turned out to be useful for dating Earth materials and for coming up with a quantitative age for Earth. Scientists not only date ancient rocks from Earths crust, they also date meteorites that formed at the same time Earth and the rest of the solar system were forming. Moon rocks also have been radiometrically dated. Using a combination of radiometric dating, index fossils, and superposition, geologists have constructed a well- defined timeline of Earth history. With information gathered from all over the world, estimates of rock and fossil ages have become increasingly accurate. This is the modern geologic time scale with all of the ages. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	many lines of evidence indicate that earth is 46 billion years old	true
Radioactivity turned out to be useful for dating Earth materials and for coming up with a quantitative age for Earth. Scientists not only date ancient rocks from Earths crust, they also date meteorites that formed at the same time Earth and the rest of the solar system were forming. Moon rocks also have been radiometrically dated. Using a combination of radiometric dating, index fossils, and superposition, geologists have constructed a well- defined timeline of Earth history. With information gathered from all over the world, estimates of rock and fossil ages have become increasingly accurate. This is the modern geologic time scale with all of the ages. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	without radiometric dating scientists would still know the absolute age of earth	false
About 10,000 years ago, we developed the ability to grow our own food. Farming increased the yield of food plants and allowed people to have food available year round. Animals were domesticated to provide meat. With agriculture, people could settle down, so that they no longer needed to carry all their possessions (Figure 1.2). They could develop better farming practices and store food for when it was difficult to grow. Agriculture allowed people to settle in towns and cities. More advanced farming practices allowed a single farmer to grow food for many more people. When advanced farming practices allowed farmers to grow more food than they needed for their families (Figure 	farmers were able to increase the yield of food plants	true
The Green Revolution has allowed the addition of billions of people to the population in the past few decades. The Green Revolution has improved agricultural productivity by: Improving crops by selecting for traits that promote productivity; recently, genetically engineered crops have been introduced. Increasing the use of artificial fertilizers and chemical pesticides. About 23 times more fertilizer and 50 times more pesticides are used around the world than were used just 50 years ago (Figure 1.5). Agricultural machinery: plowing, tilling, fertilizing, picking, and transporting are all done by machines. About 17% of the energy used each year in the United States is for agriculture. Increasing access to water. Many farming regions depend on groundwater, which is not a renewable resource. Some regions will eventually run out of this water source. Currently about 70% of the worlds fresh water is used for agriculture. Rows of a single crop and heavy ma- chinery are normal sights for modern day farms. The Green Revolution has increased the productivity of farms immensely. A century ago, a single farmer produced enough food for 2.5 people, but now a farmer can feed more than 130 people. The Green Revolution is credited for feeding 1 billion people that would not otherwise have been able to live. 	the use of artificial fertilizers and chemical pesticides has not increased much in the past 50 years	false
What is Earths carrying capacity for humans? Are humans now exceeding Earths carrying capacity for our species? Many anthropologists say that the carrying capacity of humans on the planet without agriculture is about 10 million (Figure 1.1). This population was reached about 10,000 years ago. At the time, people lived together in small bands of hunters and gatherers. Typically men hunted and fished; women gathered nuts and vegetables. Obviously, human populations have blown past this hypothetical carrying capacity. By using our brains, our erect posture, and our hands, we have been able to manipulate our environment in ways that no other species has ever done. What have been the important developments that have allowed population to grow? 	it is possible that earths carrying capacity for humans is around 1 billion	true
Pollutants include materials that are naturally occurring but are added to the atmosphere so that they are there in larger quantities than normal. Pollutants may also be human-made compounds that have never before been found in the atmosphere. Pollutants dirty the air, change natural processes in the atmosphere, and harm living things. 	all air pollutants are humanmade materials	false
Air quality in a region is not just affected by the amount of pollutants released into the atmosphere in that location but by other geographical and atmospheric factors. Winds can move pollutants into or out of a region and a mountain range can trap pollutants on its leeward side. Inversions commonly trap pollutants within a cool air mass. If the inversion lasts long enough, pollution can reach dangerous levels. Pollutants remain over a region until they are transported out of the area by wind, diluted by air blown in from another region, transformed into other compounds, or carried to the ground when mixed with rain or snow. Table 1.1 lists the smoggiest cities in 2013: 7 of the 10 are in California. Why do you think California cities are among those with the worst air pollution? The state has the right conditions for collecting pollutants including mountain ranges that trap smoggy air, arid and sometimes windless conditions, agriculture, industry, and lots and lots of cars. Rank 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 City, State Los Angeles area, California Visalia-Porterville, California Bakersfield-Delano, California Fresno-Madera, California Hanford-Corcoran, California Sacramento area, California Houston area, Texas Dallas-Fort Worth, Texas Washington D.C. area El Centro, California 	as of 2013 most of the smoggiest cities in the united states were in california	true
Air quality in a region is not just affected by the amount of pollutants released into the atmosphere in that location but by other geographical and atmospheric factors. Winds can move pollutants into or out of a region and a mountain range can trap pollutants on its leeward side. Inversions commonly trap pollutants within a cool air mass. If the inversion lasts long enough, pollution can reach dangerous levels. Pollutants remain over a region until they are transported out of the area by wind, diluted by air blown in from another region, transformed into other compounds, or carried to the ground when mixed with rain or snow. Table 1.1 lists the smoggiest cities in 2013: 7 of the 10 are in California. Why do you think California cities are among those with the worst air pollution? The state has the right conditions for collecting pollutants including mountain ranges that trap smoggy air, arid and sometimes windless conditions, agriculture, industry, and lots and lots of cars. Rank 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 City, State Los Angeles area, California Visalia-Porterville, California Bakersfield-Delano, California Fresno-Madera, California Hanford-Corcoran, California Sacramento area, California Houston area, Texas Dallas-Fort Worth, Texas Washington D.C. area El Centro, California 	smog can build up on a winter day because inversions trap pollutants in a cool air mass	true
Thousands of objects, including comets and asteroids, are zooming around our solar system; some could be on a collision course with Earth. QUEST explores how these Near Earth Objects are being tracked and what scientists are saying should be done to prevent a deadly impact. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	asteroids are too small to have impacts with other objects so they dont have craters	false
Scientists are interested in asteroids because they are representatives of the earliest solar system (Figure 1.4). Eventually asteroids could be mined for rare minerals or for construction projects in space. A few missions have studied asteroids directly. NASAs DAWN mission explored asteroid Vesta in 2011 and 2012 and will visit dwarf planet Ceres in 2015. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  The NEAR Shoemaker probe took this photo as it was about to land on 433 Eros in 2001. 	we dont know much about asteroids because they are too small for nasa missions to visit them	false
Asteroids are very small, rocky bodies that orbit the Sun. "Asteroid" means "star-like," and in a telescope, asteroids look like points of light, just like stars. Asteroids are irregularly shaped because they do not have enough gravity to become round. They are also too small to maintain an atmosphere, and without internal heat they are not geologically active (Figure 1.1). Collisions with other bodies may break up the asteroid or create craters on its surface. Asteroid impacts have had dramatic impacts on the shaping of the planets, including Earth. Early impacts caused the planets to grow as they cleared their portions of space. An impact with an asteroid about the size of Mars caused fragments of Earth to fly into space and ultimately create the Moon. Asteroid impacts are linked to mass extinctions throughout Earths history. 	an asteroid the size of mars hit earth sending fragments of earth into space to create the moon	true
More than 4,500 asteroids cross Earths orbit; they are near-Earth asteroids. Between 500 and 1,000 of these are over 1 km in diameter. Any object whose orbit crosses Earths can collide with Earth, and many asteroids do. On average, each year a rock about 5-10 m in diameter hits Earth (Figure 1.3). Since past asteroid impacts have been implicated in mass extinctions, astronomers are always on the lookout for new asteroids, and follow the known near-Earth asteroids closely, so they can predict a possible collision as early as possible. A painting of what an asteroid a few kilometers across might look like as it strikes Earth. 	an asteroid could cause humans to go extinct	true
Besides abundance, a resources value is determined by how easy it is to locate and extract. If a resource is difficult to use, it will not be used until the price for that resource becomes so great that it is worth paying for. For example, the oceans are filled with an abundant supply of water, but desalination is costly, so it is used only where water is really limited (Figure 1.1). As the cost of desalination plants comes down, more will likely be built. Tampa Bay, Florida, has one of the few desalination plants in the United States. 	if a nation is wealthy it can determine the price of a resource	false
The topic of overconsumption was touched on in the chapter Life on Earth. Many people in developed countries, such as the United States and most of Europe, use many more natural resources than people in many other countries. We have many luxury and recreational items, and it is often cheaper for us to throw something away than to fix it or just hang on to it for a while longer. This consumerism leads to greater resource use, but it also leads to more waste. Pollution from discarded materials degrades the land, air, and water (Figure 1.3). Natural resource use is generally lower in developing countries because people cannot afford many products. Some of these nations export natural resources to the developed world since their deposits may be richer and the cost of labor lower. Environmental regulations are often more lax, further lowering the cost of resource extraction. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  The nations in blue are the 12 biggest producers of oil; they are Algeria, Angola, Ecuador, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, and Venezuela. Pollution from discarded materials de- grades the environment and reduces the availability of natural resources. 	overconsumption is the recognition that people in developed countries use many more natural resources than people in developing countries	true
From the table in the concept "Materials Humans Use," you can see that many of the resources we depend on are non-renewable. Non-renewable resources vary in their availability; some are very abundant and others are rare. Materials, such as gravel or sand, are technically non-renewable, but they are so abundant that running out is no issue. Some resources are truly limited in quantity: when they are gone, they are gone, and something must be found that will replace them. There are even resources, such as diamonds and rubies, that are valuable in part because they are so rare. 	discarding an item costs natural resources and contributes to pollution	true
From the table in the concept "Materials Humans Use," you can see that many of the resources we depend on are non-renewable. Non-renewable resources vary in their availability; some are very abundant and others are rare. Materials, such as gravel or sand, are technically non-renewable, but they are so abundant that running out is no issue. Some resources are truly limited in quantity: when they are gone, they are gone, and something must be found that will replace them. There are even resources, such as diamonds and rubies, that are valuable in part because they are so rare. 	since natural resources are distributed fairly evenly around the planet nations can usually obtain what they need	false
As we have seen, the ocean floor is not flat: mid-ocean ridges, deep sea trenches, and other features all rise sharply above or plunge deeply below the abyssal plains. In fact, Earths tallest mountain is Mauna Kea volcano, which rises 10,203 m (33,476 ft.)meters) from the Pacific Ocean floor to become one of the volcanic mountains of Hawaii. The deepest canyon is also on the ocean floor, the Challenger Deep in the Marianas Trench, 10,916 m (35,814 ft). The continental margin is the transition from the land to the deep sea or, geologically speaking, from continental crust to oceanic crust. More than one-quarter of the ocean basin is continental margin. (Figure 1.3). Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	from the bottom of the deepest trench to the top of the highest mountain the relief of the pacific ocean basin totals nearly 70000 feet	true
As we have seen, the ocean floor is not flat: mid-ocean ridges, deep sea trenches, and other features all rise sharply above or plunge deeply below the abyssal plains. In fact, Earths tallest mountain is Mauna Kea volcano, which rises 10,203 m (33,476 ft.)meters) from the Pacific Ocean floor to become one of the volcanic mountains of Hawaii. The deepest canyon is also on the ocean floor, the Challenger Deep in the Marianas Trench, 10,916 m (35,814 ft). The continental margin is the transition from the land to the deep sea or, geologically speaking, from continental crust to oceanic crust. More than one-quarter of the ocean basin is continental margin. (Figure 1.3). Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the continental shelf is made up of the continental margin continental slope and continental rise	false
Timeline of the Big Bang and the expan- sion of the Universe. The Big Bang theory is the most widely accepted cosmological explanation of how the universe formed. If we start at the present and go back into the past, the universe is contracting  getting smaller and smaller. What is the end result of a contracting universe? According to the Big Bang theory, the universe began about 13.7 billion years ago. Everything that is now in the universe was squeezed into a very small volume. Imagine all of the known universe in a single, hot, chaotic mass. An enormous explosion  a big bang  caused the universe to start expanding rapidly. All the matter and energy in the universe, and even space itself, came out of this explosion. What came before the Big Bang? There is no way for scientists to know since there is no remaining evidence. 	the first stars didnt form until about 4 billion years after the big bang	false
After the origin of the Big Bang hypothesis, many astronomers still thought the universe was static. Nearly all came around when an important line of evidence for the Big Bang was discovered in 1964. In a static universe, the space between objects should have no heat at all; the temperature should measure 0 K (Kelvin is an absolute temperature scale). But two researchers at Bell Laboratories used a microwave receiver to learn that the background radiation in the universe is not 0 K, but 3 K (Figure 1.3). This tiny amount of heat is left over from the Big Bang. Since nearly Images from very far away show what the universe was like not too long after the Big Bang. all astronomers now accept the Big Bang hypothesis, what is it usually referred to as? Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	scientists have discovered the temperature of space is 3oc	false
Timeline of the Big Bang and the expan- sion of the Universe. The Big Bang theory is the most widely accepted cosmological explanation of how the universe formed. If we start at the present and go back into the past, the universe is contracting  getting smaller and smaller. What is the end result of a contracting universe? According to the Big Bang theory, the universe began about 13.7 billion years ago. Everything that is now in the universe was squeezed into a very small volume. Imagine all of the known universe in a single, hot, chaotic mass. An enormous explosion  a big bang  caused the universe to start expanding rapidly. All the matter and energy in the universe, and even space itself, came out of this explosion. What came before the Big Bang? There is no way for scientists to know since there is no remaining evidence. 	its very difficult to determine scientifically what existed before the big bang because there is no evidence	true
The short term cycling of carbon begins with carbon dioxide (CO2 ) in the atmosphere. 	you breathe in oxygen and breathe out carbon dioxide	true
Plants and animals engage in the reverse of photosynthesis, which is respiration. In respiration, animals use oxygen to convert the organic carbon in sugar into food energy they can use. Plants also go through respiration and consume some of the sugars they produce. The chemical reaction for respiration is: C6 H12 O6 + 6 O2  6 CO2 + 6 H2 O + useable energy Photosynthesis and respiration are a gas exchange process. In photosynthesis, CO2 is converted to O2 ; in respiration, O2 is converted to CO2 . Remember that plants do not create energy. They change the energy from sunlight into chemical energy that plants and animals can use as food (Figure 1.1). 	respiration and photosynthesis are gas exchange processes with the exchange being between co2 and o2	true
The short term cycling of carbon begins with carbon dioxide (CO2 ) in the atmosphere. 	the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is very low but small changes make a big difference	true
Most air pollutants come from burning fossil fuels or plant material. Some are the result of evaporation from human- made materials. Nearly half (49%) of air pollution comes from transportation, 28% from factories and power plants, and the remaining pollution from a variety of other sources. 	burning trees produces most of the same pollutants as burning fossil fuels	true
To be considered alive a molecule must: be organic. The organic molecules needed are amino acids, the building blocks of life. have a metabolism. be capable of replication (be able to reproduce). 	amino acids are linked together by ionic bonds to form monomers called polypeptides	false
To see if amino acids could originate in the environment thought to be present in the first years of Earths existence, Stanley Miller and Harold Urey performed a famous experiment in 1953. To simulate the early atmosphere they Amino acids form polypeptide chains. The setup of the Miller-Urey experiment. placed hydrogen, methane, and ammonia in a flask of heated water that created water vapor, which they called the primordial soup. Sparks simulated lightning, which the scientists thought could have been the energy that drove the chemical reactions that created the amino acids. It worked! The gases combined to form water-soluble organic compounds including amino acids. Amino acids might also have originated at hydrothermal vents or deep in the crust where Earths internal heat is the energy source. Meteorites containing amino acids currently enter the Earth system and so meteorites could have delivered amino acids to the planet from elsewhere in the solar system (where they would have formed by processes similar to those outlined here). 	in the millerurey experiment electric sparks provided the energy that drove the chemical reactions	true
Amino acids are the building blocks of life because they create proteins. To form proteins, the amino acids are linked together by covalent bonds to form polymers called polypeptide chains (Figure 1.1). These chains are arranged in a specific order to form each different type of protein. Proteins are the most abundant class of biological molecules. An important question facing scientists is where the first amino acids came from: did they originate on Earth or did they fly in from outer space? No matter where they originated, the creation of amino acids requires the right starting materials and some energy. 	scientists think that life on earth originated once	false
To be considered alive a molecule must: be organic. The organic molecules needed are amino acids, the building blocks of life. have a metabolism. be capable of replication (be able to reproduce). 	a primary protein structure is a sequence of a chain of amino acids	true
Ions come together to create a molecule so that electrical charges are balanced; the positive charges balance the negative charges and the molecule has no electrical charge. To balance electrical charge, an atom may share its electron with another atom, give it away, or receive an electron from another atom. The joining of ions to make molecules is called chemical bonding. There are three main types of chemical bonds that are important in our discussion of minerals and rocks: Ionic bond: Electrons are transferred between atoms. An ion will give one or more electrons to another ion. Table salt, sodium chloride (NaCl), is a common example of an ionic compound. Note that sodium is on the left side of the periodic table and that chlorine is on the right side of the periodic table. In the Figure 1.2, an atom of lithium donates an electron to an atom of fluorine to form an ionic compound. The transfer of the electron gives the lithium ion a net charge of +1, and the fluorine ion a net charge of -1. These ions bond because they experience an attractive force due to the difference in sign of their charges. Covalent bond : In a covalent bond, an atom shares one or more electrons with another atom. Periodic Table of the Elements. Lithium (left) and fluorine (right) form an ionic compound called lithium fluoride. In the picture of methane (CH4 ) below (Figure 1.3), the carbon ion (with a net charge of +4) shares a single electron from each of the the four hydrogens. Covalent bonding is prevalent in organic compounds. In fact, your body is held together by electrons shared by carbons and hydrogens! Covalent bonds are also very strong, meaning it takes a lot of energy to break them apart. Hydrogen bond: These weak, intermolecular bonds are formed when the positive side of one polar molecule is attracted to the negative side of another polar molecule. Water is a classic example of a polar molecule because it has a slightly positive side, and a slightly negative side. In fact, this property is why water is so good at dissolving things. The positive side of the molecule is attracted to Methane is formed when four hydrogens and one carbon covalently bond. negative ions and the negative side is attracted to positive ions. 	a polar molecule is slightly positive on one side and slightly negative on the other	true
Ions come together to create a molecule so that electrical charges are balanced; the positive charges balance the negative charges and the molecule has no electrical charge. To balance electrical charge, an atom may share its electron with another atom, give it away, or receive an electron from another atom. The joining of ions to make molecules is called chemical bonding. There are three main types of chemical bonds that are important in our discussion of minerals and rocks: Ionic bond: Electrons are transferred between atoms. An ion will give one or more electrons to another ion. Table salt, sodium chloride (NaCl), is a common example of an ionic compound. Note that sodium is on the left side of the periodic table and that chlorine is on the right side of the periodic table. In the Figure 1.2, an atom of lithium donates an electron to an atom of fluorine to form an ionic compound. The transfer of the electron gives the lithium ion a net charge of +1, and the fluorine ion a net charge of -1. These ions bond because they experience an attractive force due to the difference in sign of their charges. Covalent bond : In a covalent bond, an atom shares one or more electrons with another atom. Periodic Table of the Elements. Lithium (left) and fluorine (right) form an ionic compound called lithium fluoride. In the picture of methane (CH4 ) below (Figure 1.3), the carbon ion (with a net charge of +4) shares a single electron from each of the the four hydrogens. Covalent bonding is prevalent in organic compounds. In fact, your body is held together by electrons shared by carbons and hydrogens! Covalent bonds are also very strong, meaning it takes a lot of energy to break them apart. Hydrogen bond: These weak, intermolecular bonds are formed when the positive side of one polar molecule is attracted to the negative side of another polar molecule. Water is a classic example of a polar molecule because it has a slightly positive side, and a slightly negative side. In fact, this property is why water is so good at dissolving things. The positive side of the molecule is attracted to Methane is formed when four hydrogens and one carbon covalently bond. negative ions and the negative side is attracted to positive ions. 	table salt is an example of hydrogen bonding in which sodium is positive and chlorine is negative	false
Ions come together to create a molecule so that electrical charges are balanced; the positive charges balance the negative charges and the molecule has no electrical charge. To balance electrical charge, an atom may share its electron with another atom, give it away, or receive an electron from another atom. The joining of ions to make molecules is called chemical bonding. There are three main types of chemical bonds that are important in our discussion of minerals and rocks: Ionic bond: Electrons are transferred between atoms. An ion will give one or more electrons to another ion. Table salt, sodium chloride (NaCl), is a common example of an ionic compound. Note that sodium is on the left side of the periodic table and that chlorine is on the right side of the periodic table. In the Figure 1.2, an atom of lithium donates an electron to an atom of fluorine to form an ionic compound. The transfer of the electron gives the lithium ion a net charge of +1, and the fluorine ion a net charge of -1. These ions bond because they experience an attractive force due to the difference in sign of their charges. Covalent bond : In a covalent bond, an atom shares one or more electrons with another atom. Periodic Table of the Elements. Lithium (left) and fluorine (right) form an ionic compound called lithium fluoride. In the picture of methane (CH4 ) below (Figure 1.3), the carbon ion (with a net charge of +4) shares a single electron from each of the the four hydrogens. Covalent bonding is prevalent in organic compounds. In fact, your body is held together by electrons shared by carbons and hydrogens! Covalent bonds are also very strong, meaning it takes a lot of energy to break them apart. Hydrogen bond: These weak, intermolecular bonds are formed when the positive side of one polar molecule is attracted to the negative side of another polar molecule. Water is a classic example of a polar molecule because it has a slightly positive side, and a slightly negative side. In fact, this property is why water is so good at dissolving things. The positive side of the molecule is attracted to Methane is formed when four hydrogens and one carbon covalently bond. negative ions and the negative side is attracted to positive ions. 	covalent bonds are weak it does not take a lot of energy to break them apart	false
Ions come together to create a molecule so that electrical charges are balanced; the positive charges balance the negative charges and the molecule has no electrical charge. To balance electrical charge, an atom may share its electron with another atom, give it away, or receive an electron from another atom. The joining of ions to make molecules is called chemical bonding. There are three main types of chemical bonds that are important in our discussion of minerals and rocks: Ionic bond: Electrons are transferred between atoms. An ion will give one or more electrons to another ion. Table salt, sodium chloride (NaCl), is a common example of an ionic compound. Note that sodium is on the left side of the periodic table and that chlorine is on the right side of the periodic table. In the Figure 1.2, an atom of lithium donates an electron to an atom of fluorine to form an ionic compound. The transfer of the electron gives the lithium ion a net charge of +1, and the fluorine ion a net charge of -1. These ions bond because they experience an attractive force due to the difference in sign of their charges. Covalent bond : In a covalent bond, an atom shares one or more electrons with another atom. Periodic Table of the Elements. Lithium (left) and fluorine (right) form an ionic compound called lithium fluoride. In the picture of methane (CH4 ) below (Figure 1.3), the carbon ion (with a net charge of +4) shares a single electron from each of the the four hydrogens. Covalent bonding is prevalent in organic compounds. In fact, your body is held together by electrons shared by carbons and hydrogens! Covalent bonds are also very strong, meaning it takes a lot of energy to break them apart. Hydrogen bond: These weak, intermolecular bonds are formed when the positive side of one polar molecule is attracted to the negative side of another polar molecule. Water is a classic example of a polar molecule because it has a slightly positive side, and a slightly negative side. In fact, this property is why water is so good at dissolving things. The positive side of the molecule is attracted to Methane is formed when four hydrogens and one carbon covalently bond. negative ions and the negative side is attracted to positive ions. 	water forms droplets because a hydrogen bond is a strong bond	false
Ions come together to create a molecule so that electrical charges are balanced; the positive charges balance the negative charges and the molecule has no electrical charge. To balance electrical charge, an atom may share its electron with another atom, give it away, or receive an electron from another atom. The joining of ions to make molecules is called chemical bonding. There are three main types of chemical bonds that are important in our discussion of minerals and rocks: Ionic bond: Electrons are transferred between atoms. An ion will give one or more electrons to another ion. Table salt, sodium chloride (NaCl), is a common example of an ionic compound. Note that sodium is on the left side of the periodic table and that chlorine is on the right side of the periodic table. In the Figure 1.2, an atom of lithium donates an electron to an atom of fluorine to form an ionic compound. The transfer of the electron gives the lithium ion a net charge of +1, and the fluorine ion a net charge of -1. These ions bond because they experience an attractive force due to the difference in sign of their charges. Covalent bond : In a covalent bond, an atom shares one or more electrons with another atom. Periodic Table of the Elements. Lithium (left) and fluorine (right) form an ionic compound called lithium fluoride. In the picture of methane (CH4 ) below (Figure 1.3), the carbon ion (with a net charge of +4) shares a single electron from each of the the four hydrogens. Covalent bonding is prevalent in organic compounds. In fact, your body is held together by electrons shared by carbons and hydrogens! Covalent bonds are also very strong, meaning it takes a lot of energy to break them apart. Hydrogen bond: These weak, intermolecular bonds are formed when the positive side of one polar molecule is attracted to the negative side of another polar molecule. Water is a classic example of a polar molecule because it has a slightly positive side, and a slightly negative side. In fact, this property is why water is so good at dissolving things. The positive side of the molecule is attracted to Methane is formed when four hydrogens and one carbon covalently bond. negative ions and the negative side is attracted to positive ions. 	elements on the left side of the periodic table are electron donors while those on the right side are electron acceptors	true
Preventing groundwater contamination is much easier and cheaper than cleaning it. To clean groundwater, the water, as well as the rock and soil through which it travels, must be cleansed. Thoroughly cleaning an aquifer would require cleansing each pore within the soil or rock unit. For this reason, cleaning polluted groundwater is very costly, takes years, and is sometimes not technically feasible. If the toxic materials can be removed from the aquifer, disposing of them is another challenge. 	it is easier and cheaper to clean up groundwater than to prevent it	false
First, an underground barrier is constructed to isolate the contaminated groundwater from the rest of the aquifer. Next, the contaminated groundwater may be treated in place. Bioremediation is relatively inexpensive. Bioengineered microorganisms are injected into the contaminant plume and allowed to consume the pollutant. Air may be pumped into the polluted region to encourage the growth and reproduction of the microbes. With chemical remediation, a chemical is pumped into the aquifer so the contaminant is destroyed. Acids or bases can neutralize contaminants or cause pollutants to precipitate from the water. The most difficult and expensive option is for reclamation teams to pump the water to the surface, cleanse it using chemical or biological methods, then re-inject it into the aquifer. The contaminated portions of the aquifer must be dug up and the pollutant destroyed by incinerating or chemically processing the soil, which is then returned to the ground. This technique is often prohibitively expensive and is done only in extreme cases. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the most dangerous contaminants in water are the ones that are visible	false
Preventing groundwater contamination is much easier and cheaper than cleaning it. To clean groundwater, the water, as well as the rock and soil through which it travels, must be cleansed. Thoroughly cleaning an aquifer would require cleansing each pore within the soil or rock unit. For this reason, cleaning polluted groundwater is very costly, takes years, and is sometimes not technically feasible. If the toxic materials can be removed from the aquifer, disposing of them is another challenge. 	pumping water to the surface to clean the pollutant is more expensive than in situ cleaning methods because the soil and rock must be cleaned too	true
Climate has changed throughout Earth history. Much of the time Earths climate was hotter and more humid than it is today, but climate has also been colder, as when glaciers covered much more of the planet. The most recent ice ages were in the Pleistocene Epoch, between 1.8 million and 10,000 years ago (Figure 1.1). Glaciers advanced and retreated in cycles, known as glacial and interglacial periods. With so much of the worlds water bound into the ice, sea level was about 125 meters (395 feet) lower than it is today. Many scientists think that we are now in a warm, interglacial period that has lasted about 10,000 years. For the past 1500 years, climate has been relatively mild and stable when compared with much of Earths history. Why has climate stability been beneficial for human civilization? Stability has allowed the expansion of agriculture and the development of towns and cities. Fairly small temperature changes can have major effects on global climate. The average global temperature during glacial periods was only about 5.5o C (10o F) less than Earths current average temperature. Temperatures during the interglacial periods were about 1.1o C (2.0o F) higher than today (Figure 1.2). The maximum extent of Northern Hemi- sphere glaciers during the Pleistocene epoch. Since the end of the Pleistocene, the global average temperature has risen about 4o C (7o F). Glaciers are retreating and sea level is rising. While climate is getting steadily warmer, there have been a few more extreme warm and cool times in the last 10,000 years. Changes in climate have had effects on human civilization. The Medieval Warm Period from 900 to 1300 A.D. allowed Vikings to colonize Greenland and Great Britain to grow wine grapes. The Little Ice Age, from the 14th to 19th centuries, the Vikings were forced out of Greenland and humans had to plant crops further south. The graph is a compilation of 5 recon- structions (the green line is the mean of the five records) of mean temperature changes. This illustrates the high tem- peratures of the Medieval Warm Period, the lows of the Little Ice Age, and the very high (and climbing) temperature of this decade. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	throughout earths history its climate has always been colder and less humid than it is today	false
Climate has changed throughout Earth history. Much of the time Earths climate was hotter and more humid than it is today, but climate has also been colder, as when glaciers covered much more of the planet. The most recent ice ages were in the Pleistocene Epoch, between 1.8 million and 10,000 years ago (Figure 1.1). Glaciers advanced and retreated in cycles, known as glacial and interglacial periods. With so much of the worlds water bound into the ice, sea level was about 125 meters (395 feet) lower than it is today. Many scientists think that we are now in a warm, interglacial period that has lasted about 10,000 years. For the past 1500 years, climate has been relatively mild and stable when compared with much of Earths history. Why has climate stability been beneficial for human civilization? Stability has allowed the expansion of agriculture and the development of towns and cities. Fairly small temperature changes can have major effects on global climate. The average global temperature during glacial periods was only about 5.5o C (10o F) less than Earths current average temperature. Temperatures during the interglacial periods were about 1.1o C (2.0o F) higher than today (Figure 1.2). The maximum extent of Northern Hemi- sphere glaciers during the Pleistocene epoch. Since the end of the Pleistocene, the global average temperature has risen about 4o C (7o F). Glaciers are retreating and sea level is rising. While climate is getting steadily warmer, there have been a few more extreme warm and cool times in the last 10,000 years. Changes in climate have had effects on human civilization. The Medieval Warm Period from 900 to 1300 A.D. allowed Vikings to colonize Greenland and Great Britain to grow wine grapes. The Little Ice Age, from the 14th to 19th centuries, the Vikings were forced out of Greenland and humans had to plant crops further south. The graph is a compilation of 5 recon- structions (the green line is the mean of the five records) of mean temperature changes. This illustrates the high tem- peratures of the Medieval Warm Period, the lows of the Little Ice Age, and the very high (and climbing) temperature of this decade. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	when glaciers retreat sea level rises	true
Climate has changed throughout Earth history. Much of the time Earths climate was hotter and more humid than it is today, but climate has also been colder, as when glaciers covered much more of the planet. The most recent ice ages were in the Pleistocene Epoch, between 1.8 million and 10,000 years ago (Figure 1.1). Glaciers advanced and retreated in cycles, known as glacial and interglacial periods. With so much of the worlds water bound into the ice, sea level was about 125 meters (395 feet) lower than it is today. Many scientists think that we are now in a warm, interglacial period that has lasted about 10,000 years. For the past 1500 years, climate has been relatively mild and stable when compared with much of Earths history. Why has climate stability been beneficial for human civilization? Stability has allowed the expansion of agriculture and the development of towns and cities. Fairly small temperature changes can have major effects on global climate. The average global temperature during glacial periods was only about 5.5o C (10o F) less than Earths current average temperature. Temperatures during the interglacial periods were about 1.1o C (2.0o F) higher than today (Figure 1.2). The maximum extent of Northern Hemi- sphere glaciers during the Pleistocene epoch. Since the end of the Pleistocene, the global average temperature has risen about 4o C (7o F). Glaciers are retreating and sea level is rising. While climate is getting steadily warmer, there have been a few more extreme warm and cool times in the last 10,000 years. Changes in climate have had effects on human civilization. The Medieval Warm Period from 900 to 1300 A.D. allowed Vikings to colonize Greenland and Great Britain to grow wine grapes. The Little Ice Age, from the 14th to 19th centuries, the Vikings were forced out of Greenland and humans had to plant crops further south. The graph is a compilation of 5 recon- structions (the green line is the mean of the five records) of mean temperature changes. This illustrates the high tem- peratures of the Medieval Warm Period, the lows of the Little Ice Age, and the very high (and climbing) temperature of this decade. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	fairly small changes in temperature can have major effects on global climate	true
Climate has changed throughout Earth history. Much of the time Earths climate was hotter and more humid than it is today, but climate has also been colder, as when glaciers covered much more of the planet. The most recent ice ages were in the Pleistocene Epoch, between 1.8 million and 10,000 years ago (Figure 1.1). Glaciers advanced and retreated in cycles, known as glacial and interglacial periods. With so much of the worlds water bound into the ice, sea level was about 125 meters (395 feet) lower than it is today. Many scientists think that we are now in a warm, interglacial period that has lasted about 10,000 years. For the past 1500 years, climate has been relatively mild and stable when compared with much of Earths history. Why has climate stability been beneficial for human civilization? Stability has allowed the expansion of agriculture and the development of towns and cities. Fairly small temperature changes can have major effects on global climate. The average global temperature during glacial periods was only about 5.5o C (10o F) less than Earths current average temperature. Temperatures during the interglacial periods were about 1.1o C (2.0o F) higher than today (Figure 1.2). The maximum extent of Northern Hemi- sphere glaciers during the Pleistocene epoch. Since the end of the Pleistocene, the global average temperature has risen about 4o C (7o F). Glaciers are retreating and sea level is rising. While climate is getting steadily warmer, there have been a few more extreme warm and cool times in the last 10,000 years. Changes in climate have had effects on human civilization. The Medieval Warm Period from 900 to 1300 A.D. allowed Vikings to colonize Greenland and Great Britain to grow wine grapes. The Little Ice Age, from the 14th to 19th centuries, the Vikings were forced out of Greenland and humans had to plant crops further south. The graph is a compilation of 5 recon- structions (the green line is the mean of the five records) of mean temperature changes. This illustrates the high tem- peratures of the Medieval Warm Period, the lows of the Little Ice Age, and the very high (and climbing) temperature of this decade. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	since the end of the ice ages temperature had been getting steadily warmer although not uniformly warmer	true
A climate type and its plants and animals make up a biome. The organisms of a biome share certain characteristics around the world, because their environment has similar advantages and challenges. The organisms have adapted to that environment in similar ways over time. For example, different species of cactus live on different continents, but they have adapted to the harsh desert in similar ways. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	plants that live in the same biome but on different continents share the same characteristics	true
Moist subtropical mid-latitude climates are found along the coastal areas in the United States. Temperature: The coldest month ranges from just below freezing to almost balmy, between -3o C and 18o C (27o to 64o F). Summers are mild, with average temperatures above 10o C (50o F). Seasons are distinct. Rainfall: There is plentiful annual rainfall. 	the moist subtropical midlatitude climate zones are found along the coastal areas in the united states	true
Climate zones are classified by the Kppen classification system. This system is based on the temperature, the amount of precipitation, and the times of year when precipitation occurs. Since climate determines the type of vegetation that grows in an area, vegetation is used as an indicator of climate type. 	most precipitation in the polar climates occurs in the summer	true
Coal forms from dead plants that settled at the bottom of ancient swamps. Lush coal swamps were common in the tropics during the Carboniferous period, which took place more than 300 million years ago (Figure 1.2). The climate was warmer then. Mud and other dead plants buried the organic material in the swamp, and burial kept oxygen away. When plants are buried without oxygen, the organic material can be preserved or fossilized. Sand and clay settling on top of the decaying plants squeezed out the water and other substances. Millions of years later, what remains is a carbon- containing rock that we know as coal. 	for coal to form during burial the organic matter must be kept away from nitrogen	false
Coal, a solid fossil fuel formed from the partially decomposed remains of ancient forests, is burned primarily to produce electricity. Coal use is undergoing enormous growth as the availability of oil and natural gas decreases and cost increases. This increase in coal use is happening particularly in developing nations, such as China, where coal is cheap and plentiful. Coal is black or brownish-black. The most common form of coal is bituminous, a sedimentary rock that contains impurities such as sulfur (Figure 1.1). Anthracite coal has been metamorphosed and is nearly all carbon. For this reason, anthracite coal burns more cleanly than bituminous coal. 	coal that forms at higher temperatures burns more cleanly	true
Most ocean pollution comes as runoff from land and originates as agricultural, industrial, and municipal wastes (Figure 1.1). The remaining 20% of water pollution enters the ocean directly from oil spills and people dumping wastes directly into the water. Ships at sea empty their wastes directly into the ocean, for example. Coastal pollution can make coastal water unsafe for humans and wildlife. After rainfall, there can be enough runoff pollution that beaches must be closed to prevent the spread of disease from pollutants. A surprising number of beaches are closed because of possible health hazards each year. A large proportion of the fish we rely on for food live in the coastal wetlands or lay their eggs there. Coastal runoff from farm waste often carries water-borne organisms that cause lesions that kill fish. Humans who come in In some areas of the world, ocean pollution is all too obvious. contact with polluted waters and affected fish can also experience harmful symptoms. More than one-third of the shellfish-growing waters of the United States are adversely affected by coastal pollution. 	most ocean pollution comes from land and is found in or near coastal regions	true
Most ocean pollution comes as runoff from land and originates as agricultural, industrial, and municipal wastes (Figure 1.1). The remaining 20% of water pollution enters the ocean directly from oil spills and people dumping wastes directly into the water. Ships at sea empty their wastes directly into the ocean, for example. Coastal pollution can make coastal water unsafe for humans and wildlife. After rainfall, there can be enough runoff pollution that beaches must be closed to prevent the spread of disease from pollutants. A surprising number of beaches are closed because of possible health hazards each year. A large proportion of the fish we rely on for food live in the coastal wetlands or lay their eggs there. Coastal runoff from farm waste often carries water-borne organisms that cause lesions that kill fish. Humans who come in In some areas of the world, ocean pollution is all too obvious. contact with polluted waters and affected fish can also experience harmful symptoms. More than one-third of the shellfish-growing waters of the United States are adversely affected by coastal pollution. 	fish are affected by oceanic pollutants but humans are not affected because they do not live in the ocean	false
Most ocean pollution comes as runoff from land and originates as agricultural, industrial, and municipal wastes (Figure 1.1). The remaining 20% of water pollution enters the ocean directly from oil spills and people dumping wastes directly into the water. Ships at sea empty their wastes directly into the ocean, for example. Coastal pollution can make coastal water unsafe for humans and wildlife. After rainfall, there can be enough runoff pollution that beaches must be closed to prevent the spread of disease from pollutants. A surprising number of beaches are closed because of possible health hazards each year. A large proportion of the fish we rely on for food live in the coastal wetlands or lay their eggs there. Coastal runoff from farm waste often carries water-borne organisms that cause lesions that kill fish. Humans who come in In some areas of the world, ocean pollution is all too obvious. contact with polluted waters and affected fish can also experience harmful symptoms. More than one-third of the shellfish-growing waters of the United States are adversely affected by coastal pollution. 	ships at sea treat their wastes and bring their trash back to land for recycling	false
Comets are small, icy objects that have very elliptical orbits around the Sun. Their orbits carry them from the outer solar system to the inner solar system, close to the Sun. Early in Earths history, comets may have brought water and other substances to Earth during collisions. Comet tails form the outer layers of ice melt and evaporate as the comet flies close to the Sun. The ice from the comet vaporizes and forms a glowing coma, which reflects light from the Sun. Radiation and particles streaming from the Sun push this gas and dust into a long tail that always points away from the Sun (Figure 1.1). Comets appear for only a short time when they are near the Sun, then seem to disappear again as they move back to the outer solar system. Comet Hale-Bopp, also called the Great Comet of 1997, shone brightly for several months in 1997. The comet has two visible tails: a bright, curved dust tail and a fainter, straight tail of ions (charged atoms) pointing directly away from the Sun. The time between one appearance of a comet and the next is called the comets period. Halleys comet, with a period of 75 years, will next be seen in 2061. The first mention of the comet in historical records may go back as much as two millennia. 	without its tail a comet looks like a ball of ice	true
Short-period comets, with periods of about 200 years or less, come from a region beyond the orbit of Neptune called the Kuiper belt (pronounced KI-per). It contains not only comets, but also asteroids and at least two dwarf planets. Comets with periods as long as thousands or even millions of years come from a very distant region of the solar system called the Oort cloud, about 50,000  100,000 AU from the Sun (50,000 - 100,000 times the distance from the Sun to Earth). Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the oort cloud is about 50000100000 au from the sun	true
Water consumption per person has been going down for the past few decades. There are many ways that water conservation can be encouraged. Charging more for water gives a financial incentive for careful water use. Water use may be restricted by time of day, season, or activity. Good behavior can be encouraged; for example, people can be given an incentive to replace grass with desert plants in arid regions. 	plant whatever types of plants you like no matter where you live	false
As human population growth continues, water conservation will become increasingly important globally, especially in developed countries where people use an enormous amount of water. What are some of the ways you can conserve water in and around your home? Avoid polluting water so that less is needed. Convert to more efficient irrigation methods on farms and in gardens. Reduce household demand by installing water-saving devices such as low-flow shower heads and toilets. Reduce personal demand by turning off the tap when water is not being used and taking shorter showers. Engage in water-saving practices: for instance, water lawns less and sweep rather than hose down sidewalks. At Earth Summit 2002, many governments approved a Plan of Action to address the scarcity of water and safe drinking water in developing countries. One goal of this plan was to cut in half the number of people without access to safe drinking water by 2015. Although this is a very important goal, it will not be met. Goals like these are made more difficult as population continues to grow. This colorful adobe house in Tucson, Arizona is surrounded by native cactus, which needs little water to thrive. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	lawns and golf courses conserve water because they trap water within them	false
As human population growth continues, water conservation will become increasingly important globally, especially in developed countries where people use an enormous amount of water. What are some of the ways you can conserve water in and around your home? Avoid polluting water so that less is needed. Convert to more efficient irrigation methods on farms and in gardens. Reduce household demand by installing water-saving devices such as low-flow shower heads and toilets. Reduce personal demand by turning off the tap when water is not being used and taking shorter showers. Engage in water-saving practices: for instance, water lawns less and sweep rather than hose down sidewalks. At Earth Summit 2002, many governments approved a Plan of Action to address the scarcity of water and safe drinking water in developing countries. One goal of this plan was to cut in half the number of people without access to safe drinking water by 2015. Although this is a very important goal, it will not be met. Goals like these are made more difficult as population continues to grow. This colorful adobe house in Tucson, Arizona is surrounded by native cactus, which needs little water to thrive. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	it is better to sweep the sidewalks rather than hosing them down with water	true
As human population growth continues, water conservation will become increasingly important globally, especially in developed countries where people use an enormous amount of water. What are some of the ways you can conserve water in and around your home? Avoid polluting water so that less is needed. Convert to more efficient irrigation methods on farms and in gardens. Reduce household demand by installing water-saving devices such as low-flow shower heads and toilets. Reduce personal demand by turning off the tap when water is not being used and taking shorter showers. Engage in water-saving practices: for instance, water lawns less and sweep rather than hose down sidewalks. At Earth Summit 2002, many governments approved a Plan of Action to address the scarcity of water and safe drinking water in developing countries. One goal of this plan was to cut in half the number of people without access to safe drinking water by 2015. Although this is a very important goal, it will not be met. Goals like these are made more difficult as population continues to grow. This colorful adobe house in Tucson, Arizona is surrounded by native cactus, which needs little water to thrive. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	it may not seem like much but putting water on a toothbrush as needed rather than letting the water flow makes an impact especially if lots of people do it	true
Alfred Wegener, born in 1880, was a meteorologist and explorer. In 1911, Wegener found a scientific paper that listed identical plant and animal fossils on opposite sides of the Atlantic Ocean. Intrigued, he then searched for and found other cases of identical fossils on opposite sides of oceans. The explanation put out by the scientists of the day was that land bridges had once stretched between these continents. Instead, Wegener pondered the way Africa and South America appeared to fit together like puzzle pieces. Other scientists had suggested that Africa and South America had once been joined, but Wegener was the ideas most dogged supporter. Wegener amassed a tremendous amount of evidence to support his hypothesis that the continents had once been joined. Imagine that youre Wegeners colleague. What sort of evidence would you look for to see if the continents had actually been joined and had moved apart? 	scientists in the early 20th century thought that land bridges allowed land animals to travel between africa and south america	true
Here is the main evidence that Wegener and his supporters collected for the continental drift hypothesis: The continents appear to fit together. Ancient fossils of the same species of extinct plants and animals are found in rocks of the same age but are on continents that are now widely separated (Figure 1.1). Wegener proposed that the organisms had lived side by side, but that the lands had moved apart after they were dead and fossilized. His critics suggested that the organisms moved over long-gone land bridges, but Wegener thought that the organisms could not have been able to travel across the oceans. Fossils of the seed fern Glossopteris were too heavy to be carried so far by wind. Mesosaurus was a swimming reptile, but could only swim in fresh water. Cynognathus and Lystrosaurus were land reptiles and were unable to swim. Wegener used fossil evidence to support his continental drift hypothesis. The fos- sils of these organisms are found on lands that are now far apart. Identical rocks, of the same type and age, are found on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean. Wegener said the rocks had formed side by side and that the land had since moved apart. Mountain ranges with the same rock types, structures, and ages are now on opposite sides of the Atlantic Ocean. The Appalachians of the eastern United States and Canada, for example, are just like mountain ranges in eastern Greenland, Ireland, Great Britain, and Norway (Figure 1.2). Wegener concluded that they formed as a single mountain range that was separated as the continents drifted. Grooves and rock deposits left by ancient glaciers are found today on different continents very close to the Equator. This would indicate that the glaciers either formed in the middle of the ocean and/or covered most of the Earth. Today, glaciers only form on land and nearer the poles. Wegener thought that the glaciers were centered over the southern land mass close to the South Pole and the continents moved to their present positions later on. The similarities between the Appalachian and the eastern Greenland mountain ranges are evidences for the continental drift hypothesis. Coral reefs and coal-forming swamps are found in tropical and subtropical environments, but ancient coal seams and coral reefs are found in locations where it is much too cold today. Wegener suggested that these creatures were alive in warm climate zones and that the fossils and coal later drifted to new locations on the continents. Wegener thought that mountains formed as continents ran into each other. This got around the problem of the leading hypothesis of the day, which was that Earth had been a molten ball that bulked up in spots as it cooled (the problem with this idea was that the mountains should all be the same age and they were known not to be). Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	fossils of the seed fern glossopteris were easily carried by wind across oceans	false
Here is the main evidence that Wegener and his supporters collected for the continental drift hypothesis: The continents appear to fit together. Ancient fossils of the same species of extinct plants and animals are found in rocks of the same age but are on continents that are now widely separated (Figure 1.1). Wegener proposed that the organisms had lived side by side, but that the lands had moved apart after they were dead and fossilized. His critics suggested that the organisms moved over long-gone land bridges, but Wegener thought that the organisms could not have been able to travel across the oceans. Fossils of the seed fern Glossopteris were too heavy to be carried so far by wind. Mesosaurus was a swimming reptile, but could only swim in fresh water. Cynognathus and Lystrosaurus were land reptiles and were unable to swim. Wegener used fossil evidence to support his continental drift hypothesis. The fos- sils of these organisms are found on lands that are now far apart. Identical rocks, of the same type and age, are found on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean. Wegener said the rocks had formed side by side and that the land had since moved apart. Mountain ranges with the same rock types, structures, and ages are now on opposite sides of the Atlantic Ocean. The Appalachians of the eastern United States and Canada, for example, are just like mountain ranges in eastern Greenland, Ireland, Great Britain, and Norway (Figure 1.2). Wegener concluded that they formed as a single mountain range that was separated as the continents drifted. Grooves and rock deposits left by ancient glaciers are found today on different continents very close to the Equator. This would indicate that the glaciers either formed in the middle of the ocean and/or covered most of the Earth. Today, glaciers only form on land and nearer the poles. Wegener thought that the glaciers were centered over the southern land mass close to the South Pole and the continents moved to their present positions later on. The similarities between the Appalachian and the eastern Greenland mountain ranges are evidences for the continental drift hypothesis. Coral reefs and coal-forming swamps are found in tropical and subtropical environments, but ancient coal seams and coral reefs are found in locations where it is much too cold today. Wegener suggested that these creatures were alive in warm climate zones and that the fossils and coal later drifted to new locations on the continents. Wegener thought that mountains formed as continents ran into each other. This got around the problem of the leading hypothesis of the day, which was that Earth had been a molten ball that bulked up in spots as it cooled (the problem with this idea was that the mountains should all be the same age and they were known not to be). Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	continental drift is the idea that move around on earths surface	true
Here is the main evidence that Wegener and his supporters collected for the continental drift hypothesis: The continents appear to fit together. Ancient fossils of the same species of extinct plants and animals are found in rocks of the same age but are on continents that are now widely separated (Figure 1.1). Wegener proposed that the organisms had lived side by side, but that the lands had moved apart after they were dead and fossilized. His critics suggested that the organisms moved over long-gone land bridges, but Wegener thought that the organisms could not have been able to travel across the oceans. Fossils of the seed fern Glossopteris were too heavy to be carried so far by wind. Mesosaurus was a swimming reptile, but could only swim in fresh water. Cynognathus and Lystrosaurus were land reptiles and were unable to swim. Wegener used fossil evidence to support his continental drift hypothesis. The fos- sils of these organisms are found on lands that are now far apart. Identical rocks, of the same type and age, are found on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean. Wegener said the rocks had formed side by side and that the land had since moved apart. Mountain ranges with the same rock types, structures, and ages are now on opposite sides of the Atlantic Ocean. The Appalachians of the eastern United States and Canada, for example, are just like mountain ranges in eastern Greenland, Ireland, Great Britain, and Norway (Figure 1.2). Wegener concluded that they formed as a single mountain range that was separated as the continents drifted. Grooves and rock deposits left by ancient glaciers are found today on different continents very close to the Equator. This would indicate that the glaciers either formed in the middle of the ocean and/or covered most of the Earth. Today, glaciers only form on land and nearer the poles. Wegener thought that the glaciers were centered over the southern land mass close to the South Pole and the continents moved to their present positions later on. The similarities between the Appalachian and the eastern Greenland mountain ranges are evidences for the continental drift hypothesis. Coral reefs and coal-forming swamps are found in tropical and subtropical environments, but ancient coal seams and coral reefs are found in locations where it is much too cold today. Wegener suggested that these creatures were alive in warm climate zones and that the fossils and coal later drifted to new locations on the continents. Wegener thought that mountains formed as continents ran into each other. This got around the problem of the leading hypothesis of the day, which was that Earth had been a molten ball that bulked up in spots as it cooled (the problem with this idea was that the mountains should all be the same age and they were known not to be). Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the reason the hypothesis that mountains cooled in that form from molten material is good is that mountains are the same age	false
The Coriolis effect describes how Earths rotation steers winds and surface ocean currents (Figure 1.1). Coriolis causes freely moving objects to appear to move to the right in the Northern Hemisphere and to the left in the Southern Hemisphere. The objects themselves are actually moving straight, but the Earth is rotating beneath them, so they seem to bend or curve. Thats why it is incorrect to call Coriolis a force. It is not forcing anything to happen! An example might make the Coriolis effect easier to visualize. If an airplane flies 500 miles due north, it will not arrive at the city that was due north of it when it began its journey. Over the time it takes for the airplane to fly 500 miles, that city moved, along with the Earth it sits on. The airplane will therefore arrive at a city to the west of the original city (in the Northern Hemisphere), unless the pilot has compensated for the change. So to reach his intended destination, the pilot must also veer right while flying north. As wind or an ocean current moves, the Earth spins underneath it. As a result, an object moving north or south along the Earth will appear to move in a curve instead of in a straight line. Wind or water that travels toward the poles from the Equator is deflected to the east, while wind or water that travels toward the Equator from the poles gets bent to the west. The Coriolis effect bends the direction of surface currents to the right in the Northern Hemisphere and left in the Southern Hemisphere. The Coriolis effect causes winds and cur- rents to form circular patterns. The di- rection that they spin depends on the hemisphere that they are in. Coriolis effect is demonstrated using a metal ball and a rotating plate in this video. The ball moves in a circular path just like a freely moving particle of gas or liquid moves on the rotating Earth (5b). Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	coriolis effect occurs because earth is rotating beneath a moving object	true
The Coriolis effect describes how Earths rotation steers winds and surface ocean currents (Figure 1.1). Coriolis causes freely moving objects to appear to move to the right in the Northern Hemisphere and to the left in the Southern Hemisphere. The objects themselves are actually moving straight, but the Earth is rotating beneath them, so they seem to bend or curve. Thats why it is incorrect to call Coriolis a force. It is not forcing anything to happen! An example might make the Coriolis effect easier to visualize. If an airplane flies 500 miles due north, it will not arrive at the city that was due north of it when it began its journey. Over the time it takes for the airplane to fly 500 miles, that city moved, along with the Earth it sits on. The airplane will therefore arrive at a city to the west of the original city (in the Northern Hemisphere), unless the pilot has compensated for the change. So to reach his intended destination, the pilot must also veer right while flying north. As wind or an ocean current moves, the Earth spins underneath it. As a result, an object moving north or south along the Earth will appear to move in a curve instead of in a straight line. Wind or water that travels toward the poles from the Equator is deflected to the east, while wind or water that travels toward the Equator from the poles gets bent to the west. The Coriolis effect bends the direction of surface currents to the right in the Northern Hemisphere and left in the Southern Hemisphere. The Coriolis effect causes winds and cur- rents to form circular patterns. The di- rection that they spin depends on the hemisphere that they are in. Coriolis effect is demonstrated using a metal ball and a rotating plate in this video. The ball moves in a circular path just like a freely moving particle of gas or liquid moves on the rotating Earth (5b). Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	freely moving objects appear to move to the right in the southern hemisphere	false
The Coriolis effect describes how Earths rotation steers winds and surface ocean currents (Figure 1.1). Coriolis causes freely moving objects to appear to move to the right in the Northern Hemisphere and to the left in the Southern Hemisphere. The objects themselves are actually moving straight, but the Earth is rotating beneath them, so they seem to bend or curve. Thats why it is incorrect to call Coriolis a force. It is not forcing anything to happen! An example might make the Coriolis effect easier to visualize. If an airplane flies 500 miles due north, it will not arrive at the city that was due north of it when it began its journey. Over the time it takes for the airplane to fly 500 miles, that city moved, along with the Earth it sits on. The airplane will therefore arrive at a city to the west of the original city (in the Northern Hemisphere), unless the pilot has compensated for the change. So to reach his intended destination, the pilot must also veer right while flying north. As wind or an ocean current moves, the Earth spins underneath it. As a result, an object moving north or south along the Earth will appear to move in a curve instead of in a straight line. Wind or water that travels toward the poles from the Equator is deflected to the east, while wind or water that travels toward the Equator from the poles gets bent to the west. The Coriolis effect bends the direction of surface currents to the right in the Northern Hemisphere and left in the Southern Hemisphere. The Coriolis effect causes winds and cur- rents to form circular patterns. The di- rection that they spin depends on the hemisphere that they are in. Coriolis effect is demonstrated using a metal ball and a rotating plate in this video. The ball moves in a circular path just like a freely moving particle of gas or liquid moves on the rotating Earth (5b). Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	you can tell which hemisphere youre in because water in a drain always spirals right in the northern hemisphere and left in the southern hemisphere	false
The Coriolis effect describes how Earths rotation steers winds and surface ocean currents (Figure 1.1). Coriolis causes freely moving objects to appear to move to the right in the Northern Hemisphere and to the left in the Southern Hemisphere. The objects themselves are actually moving straight, but the Earth is rotating beneath them, so they seem to bend or curve. Thats why it is incorrect to call Coriolis a force. It is not forcing anything to happen! An example might make the Coriolis effect easier to visualize. If an airplane flies 500 miles due north, it will not arrive at the city that was due north of it when it began its journey. Over the time it takes for the airplane to fly 500 miles, that city moved, along with the Earth it sits on. The airplane will therefore arrive at a city to the west of the original city (in the Northern Hemisphere), unless the pilot has compensated for the change. So to reach his intended destination, the pilot must also veer right while flying north. As wind or an ocean current moves, the Earth spins underneath it. As a result, an object moving north or south along the Earth will appear to move in a curve instead of in a straight line. Wind or water that travels toward the poles from the Equator is deflected to the east, while wind or water that travels toward the Equator from the poles gets bent to the west. The Coriolis effect bends the direction of surface currents to the right in the Northern Hemisphere and left in the Southern Hemisphere. The Coriolis effect causes winds and cur- rents to form circular patterns. The di- rection that they spin depends on the hemisphere that they are in. Coriolis effect is demonstrated using a metal ball and a rotating plate in this video. The ball moves in a circular path just like a freely moving particle of gas or liquid moves on the rotating Earth (5b). Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	coriolis is an effect because it is not forcing the movement of objects to change it just appears that the movement of objects is not straight	true
1. Distinctive rock formations may be recognizable across large regions (Figure 1.1). 	a thin rock unit with a high concentration of a very rare element in it found all over the globe could be the same unit	true
2. Two separated rock units with the same index fossil are of very similar age. What traits do you think an index fossil should have? To become an index fossil the organism must have (1) been widespread so that it is useful for identifying rock layers over large areas and (2) existed for a relatively brief period of time so that the approximate age of the rock layer is immediately known. Many fossils may qualify as index fossils (Figure below). Ammonites, trilobites, and graptolites are often used as index fossils. Microfossils, which are fossils of microscopic organisms, are also useful index fossils. Fossils of animals that drifted in the upper layers of the ocean are particularly useful as index fossils, since they may be distributed over very large areas. A biostratigraphic unit, or biozone, is a geological rock layer that is defined by a single index fossil or a fossil assemblage. A biozone can also be used to identify rock layers across distances. The famous White Cliffs of Dover in southwest England can be matched to similar white cliffs in Denmark and Germany. 	the only useful index fossils are shells and skeletons of marine organisms	false
3. A key bed can be used like an index fossil since a key bed is a distinctive layer of rock that can be recognized across a large area. A volcanic ash unit could be a good key bed. One famous key bed is the clay layer at the boundary between the Cretaceous Period and the Tertiary Period, the time that the dinosaurs went extinct (Figure in asteroids. In 1980, the father-son team of Luis and Walter Alvarez proposed that a huge asteroid struck Earth 66 million years ago and caused the mass extinction. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	a good example of a key bed is the thin clay with high iridium that indicates that a huge asteroid struck earth 66 million years ago	true
Thermohaline circulation drives deep ocean circulation. Thermo means heat and haline refers to salinity. Dif- ferences in temperature and in salinity change the density of seawater. So thermohaline circulation is the result of density differences in water masses because of their different temperature and salinity. What is the temperature and salinity of very dense water? Lower temperature and higher salinity yield the densest water. When a volume of water is cooled, the molecules move less vigorously, so same number of molecules takes up less space and the water is denser. If salt is added to a volume of water, there are more molecules in the same volume, so the water is denser. 	water is denser when salt is added	true
Since unlimited amounts of water cannot sink to the bottom of the ocean, water must rise from the deep ocean to the surface somewhere. This process is called upwelling (Figure 1.2). Upwelling forces denser water from below to take the place of less dense water at the surface that is pushed away by the wind. Generally, upwelling occurs along the coast when wind blows water strongly away from the shore. This leaves a void that is filled by deep water that rises to the surface. Upwelling is extremely important where it occurs. During its time on the bottom, the cold deep water has collected nutrients that have fallen down through the water column. Upwelling brings those nutrients to the surface. Those nutrients support the growth of plankton and form the base of a rich ecosystem. California, South America, South Africa, and the Arabian Sea all benefit from offshore upwelling. Upwelling also takes place along the Equator between the North and South Equatorial Currents. Winds blow the surface water north and south of the Equator, so deep water undergoes upwelling. The nutrients rise to the surface and support a great deal of life in the equatorial oceans. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	downwelling takes place at some coastlines or along the equators and brings nutrientrich water to the surface	false
Since unlimited amounts of water cannot sink to the bottom of the ocean, water must rise from the deep ocean to the surface somewhere. This process is called upwelling (Figure 1.2). Upwelling forces denser water from below to take the place of less dense water at the surface that is pushed away by the wind. Generally, upwelling occurs along the coast when wind blows water strongly away from the shore. This leaves a void that is filled by deep water that rises to the surface. Upwelling is extremely important where it occurs. During its time on the bottom, the cold deep water has collected nutrients that have fallen down through the water column. Upwelling brings those nutrients to the surface. Those nutrients support the growth of plankton and form the base of a rich ecosystem. California, South America, South Africa, and the Arabian Sea all benefit from offshore upwelling. Upwelling also takes place along the Equator between the North and South Equatorial Currents. Winds blow the surface water north and south of the Equator, so deep water undergoes upwelling. The nutrients rise to the surface and support a great deal of life in the equatorial oceans. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	ocean currents move through the surface and deep in a large system like a conveyor belt	true
Stenos and Smiths principles are essential for determining the relative ages of rocks and rock layers. In the process of relative dating, scientists do not determine the exact age of a fossil or rock but look at a sequence of rocks to try to decipher the times that an event occurred relative to the other events represented in that sequence. The relative age of a rock then is its age in comparison with other rocks. If you know the relative ages of two rock layers, (1) Do you know which is older and which is younger? (2) Do you know how old the layers are in years? In some cases, it is very tricky to determine the sequence of events that leads to a certain formation. Can you figure out what happened in what order in (Figure 1.1)? Write it down and then check the following paragraphs. The principle of cross-cutting relationships states that a fault or intrusion is younger than the rocks that it cuts through. The fault cuts through all three sedimentary rock layers (A, B, and C) and also the intrusion (D). So the fault must be the youngest feature. The intrusion (D) cuts through the three sedimentary rock layers, so it must be younger than those layers. By the law of superposition, C is the oldest sedimentary rock, B is younger and A is still younger. The full sequence of events is: 1. Layer C formed. 2. Layer B formed. A geologic cross section: Sedimentary rocks (A-C), igneous intrusion (D), fault (E). 3. Layer A formed. 4. After layers A-B-C were present, intrusion D cut across all three. 5. Fault E formed, shifting rocks A through C and intrusion D. 6. Weathering and erosion created a layer of soil on top of layer A. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	older rocks lie above the younger rocks	false
Stenos and Smiths principles are essential for determining the relative ages of rocks and rock layers. In the process of relative dating, scientists do not determine the exact age of a fossil or rock but look at a sequence of rocks to try to decipher the times that an event occurred relative to the other events represented in that sequence. The relative age of a rock then is its age in comparison with other rocks. If you know the relative ages of two rock layers, (1) Do you know which is older and which is younger? (2) Do you know how old the layers are in years? In some cases, it is very tricky to determine the sequence of events that leads to a certain formation. Can you figure out what happened in what order in (Figure 1.1)? Write it down and then check the following paragraphs. The principle of cross-cutting relationships states that a fault or intrusion is younger than the rocks that it cuts through. The fault cuts through all three sedimentary rock layers (A, B, and C) and also the intrusion (D). So the fault must be the youngest feature. The intrusion (D) cuts through the three sedimentary rock layers, so it must be younger than those layers. By the law of superposition, C is the oldest sedimentary rock, B is younger and A is still younger. The full sequence of events is: 1. Layer C formed. 2. Layer B formed. A geologic cross section: Sedimentary rocks (A-C), igneous intrusion (D), fault (E). 3. Layer A formed. 4. After layers A-B-C were present, intrusion D cut across all three. 5. Fault E formed, shifting rocks A through C and intrusion D. 6. Weathering and erosion created a layer of soil on top of layer A. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	a fault can cut through three or more sedimentary rock layers	true
Stenos and Smiths principles are essential for determining the relative ages of rocks and rock layers. In the process of relative dating, scientists do not determine the exact age of a fossil or rock but look at a sequence of rocks to try to decipher the times that an event occurred relative to the other events represented in that sequence. The relative age of a rock then is its age in comparison with other rocks. If you know the relative ages of two rock layers, (1) Do you know which is older and which is younger? (2) Do you know how old the layers are in years? In some cases, it is very tricky to determine the sequence of events that leads to a certain formation. Can you figure out what happened in what order in (Figure 1.1)? Write it down and then check the following paragraphs. The principle of cross-cutting relationships states that a fault or intrusion is younger than the rocks that it cuts through. The fault cuts through all three sedimentary rock layers (A, B, and C) and also the intrusion (D). So the fault must be the youngest feature. The intrusion (D) cuts through the three sedimentary rock layers, so it must be younger than those layers. By the law of superposition, C is the oldest sedimentary rock, B is younger and A is still younger. The full sequence of events is: 1. Layer C formed. 2. Layer B formed. A geologic cross section: Sedimentary rocks (A-C), igneous intrusion (D), fault (E). 3. Layer A formed. 4. After layers A-B-C were present, intrusion D cut across all three. 5. Fault E formed, shifting rocks A through C and intrusion D. 6. Weathering and erosion created a layer of soil on top of layer A. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	a fault can shift rocks so that the layers no longer match up	true
Stenos and Smiths principles are essential for determining the relative ages of rocks and rock layers. In the process of relative dating, scientists do not determine the exact age of a fossil or rock but look at a sequence of rocks to try to decipher the times that an event occurred relative to the other events represented in that sequence. The relative age of a rock then is its age in comparison with other rocks. If you know the relative ages of two rock layers, (1) Do you know which is older and which is younger? (2) Do you know how old the layers are in years? In some cases, it is very tricky to determine the sequence of events that leads to a certain formation. Can you figure out what happened in what order in (Figure 1.1)? Write it down and then check the following paragraphs. The principle of cross-cutting relationships states that a fault or intrusion is younger than the rocks that it cuts through. The fault cuts through all three sedimentary rock layers (A, B, and C) and also the intrusion (D). So the fault must be the youngest feature. The intrusion (D) cuts through the three sedimentary rock layers, so it must be younger than those layers. By the law of superposition, C is the oldest sedimentary rock, B is younger and A is still younger. The full sequence of events is: 1. Layer C formed. 2. Layer B formed. A geologic cross section: Sedimentary rocks (A-C), igneous intrusion (D), fault (E). 3. Layer A formed. 4. After layers A-B-C were present, intrusion D cut across all three. 5. Fault E formed, shifting rocks A through C and intrusion D. 6. Weathering and erosion created a layer of soil on top of layer A. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	if we learn the succession of geological events in a region it only tells us about that region and does not apply to other locations	false
Before we develop some hypotheses, lets find a new question that we want to answer. What we just learned that atmospheric CO2 has been increasing at least since 1958. This leads us to ask this question: Why is atmospheric CO2 increasing? 	the law of conservation of energy says that energy cannot be created or destroyed	true
Before we develop some hypotheses, lets find a new question that we want to answer. What we just learned that atmospheric CO2 has been increasing at least since 1958. This leads us to ask this question: Why is atmospheric CO2 increasing? 	kinetic energy is energy associated with the movement of atoms or molecules that can be transferred	false
Before we develop some hypotheses, lets find a new question that we want to answer. What we just learned that atmospheric CO2 has been increasing at least since 1958. This leads us to ask this question: Why is atmospheric CO2 increasing? 	animals and plants get energy directly or indirectly from the sun	true
Distances to stars that are relatively close to us can be measured using parallax. Parallax is an apparent shift in position that takes place when the position of the observer changes. To see an example of parallax, try holding your finger about 1 foot (30 cm) in front of your eyes. Now, while focusing on your finger, close one eye and then the other. Alternate back and forth between eyes, and pay attention to how your finger appears to move. The shift in position of your finger is an example of parallax. Now try moving your finger closer to your eyes, and repeat the experiment. Do you notice any difference? The closer your finger is to your eyes, the greater the position changes because of parallax. As Figure 1.1 shows, astronomers use this same principle to measure the distance to stars. Instead of a finger, they focus on a star, and instead of switching back and forth between eyes, they switch between the biggest possible differences in observing position. To do this, an astronomer first looks at the star from one position and notes where the star is relative to more distant stars. Now where will the astronomer go to make an observation the greatest possible distance from the first observation? In six months, after Earth moves from one side of its orbit around the Sun to the other side, the astronomer looks at the star again. This time parallax causes the star to appear in a different position relative to more distant stars. From the size of this shift, astronomers can calculate the distance to the star. 	to test parallax put your finger about one foot in front of your eyes and then look at it from one eye and then the other	true
Even with the most precise instruments available, parallax is too small to measure the distance to stars that are more than a few hundred light years away. For these more distant stars, astronomers must use more indirect methods of determining distance. Most of these methods involve determining how bright the star they are looking at really is. For example, if the star has properties similar to the Sun, then it should be about as bright as the Sun. The astronomer compares the observed brightness to the expected brightness. 	even with the most precise instruments available parallax is too small to measure the distance to stars that are more than a few hundred light years away	true
Even with the most precise instruments available, parallax is too small to measure the distance to stars that are more than a few hundred light years away. For these more distant stars, astronomers must use more indirect methods of determining distance. Most of these methods involve determining how bright the star they are looking at really is. For example, if the star has properties similar to the Sun, then it should be about as bright as the Sun. The astronomer compares the observed brightness to the expected brightness. 	the more distant the star the more accurate our estimate of its distance	false
Earths oceans contain 97% of the planets water. That leaves just 3% as fresh water, water with low concentrations of salts (Figure 1.1). Most fresh water is trapped as ice in the vast glaciers and ice sheets of Greenland and Antarctica. How is the 3% of fresh water divided into different reservoirs? How much of that water is useful for living creatures? How much for people? A storage location for water such as an ocean, glacier, pond, or even the atmosphere is known as a reservoir. A water molecule may pass through a reservoir very quickly or may remain for much longer. The amount of time a molecule stays in a reservoir is known as its residence time. The distribution of Earths water. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	fresh water has no salts at all	false
Earths oceans contain 97% of the planets water. That leaves just 3% as fresh water, water with low concentrations of salts (Figure 1.1). Most fresh water is trapped as ice in the vast glaciers and ice sheets of Greenland and Antarctica. How is the 3% of fresh water divided into different reservoirs? How much of that water is useful for living creatures? How much for people? A storage location for water such as an ocean, glacier, pond, or even the atmosphere is known as a reservoir. A water molecule may pass through a reservoir very quickly or may remain for much longer. The amount of time a molecule stays in a reservoir is known as its residence time. The distribution of Earths water. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	a single water molecule may remain in a reservoir for a long or a short time	true
Earths oceans contain 97% of the planets water. That leaves just 3% as fresh water, water with low concentrations of salts (Figure 1.1). Most fresh water is trapped as ice in the vast glaciers and ice sheets of Greenland and Antarctica. How is the 3% of fresh water divided into different reservoirs? How much of that water is useful for living creatures? How much for people? A storage location for water such as an ocean, glacier, pond, or even the atmosphere is known as a reservoir. A water molecule may pass through a reservoir very quickly or may remain for much longer. The amount of time a molecule stays in a reservoir is known as its residence time. The distribution of Earths water. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	all of earths water supply is accessible for us to use	false
Earths oceans contain 97% of the planets water. That leaves just 3% as fresh water, water with low concentrations of salts (Figure 1.1). Most fresh water is trapped as ice in the vast glaciers and ice sheets of Greenland and Antarctica. How is the 3% of fresh water divided into different reservoirs? How much of that water is useful for living creatures? How much for people? A storage location for water such as an ocean, glacier, pond, or even the atmosphere is known as a reservoir. A water molecule may pass through a reservoir very quickly or may remain for much longer. The amount of time a molecule stays in a reservoir is known as its residence time. The distribution of Earths water. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	earth is unique in our solar system because it has such a large liquid water ocean	true
The dwarf planets of our solar system are exciting proof of how much we are learning about our solar system. With the discovery of many new objects in our solar system, astronomers refined the definition of a dwarf planet in 2006. According to the IAU, a dwarf planet must: Orbit a star. Have enough mass to be nearly spherical. Not have cleared the area around its orbit of smaller objects. Not be a moon. 	pluto was thought to be one of nine planets in our solar system from 1930 to 2006	true
Ceres is by far the closest dwarf planet to the Sun; it resides between Mars and Jupiter. Ceres is the largest object in the asteroid belt (Figure 1.2). Before 2006, Ceres was considered the largest of the asteroids, with only about 1.3% of the mass of the Earths Moon. But unlike the asteroids, Ceres has enough mass that its gravity causes it to be shaped like a sphere. Like Pluto, Ceres is rocky. Is Ceres a planet? How does it match the criteria above? Ceres orbits the Sun, is round, and is not a moon. As part of the asteroid belt, its orbit is full of other smaller bodies, so Ceres fails the fourth criterion for being a planet. 	although it is in the asteroid belt ceres is not an asteroid because it is spherical	true
The dwarf planets of our solar system are exciting proof of how much we are learning about our solar system. With the discovery of many new objects in our solar system, astronomers refined the definition of a dwarf planet in 2006. According to the IAU, a dwarf planet must: Orbit a star. Have enough mass to be nearly spherical. Not have cleared the area around its orbit of smaller objects. Not be a moon. 	the final totals are 8 planets and 5 dwarf planets in the solar system	false
Earths first atmosphere was made of hydrogen and helium, the gases that were common in this region of the solar system as it was forming. Most of these gases were drawn into the center of the solar nebula to form the Sun. When Earth was new and very small, the solar wind blew off atmospheric gases that collected. If gases did collect, they were vaporized by impacts, especially from the impact that brought about the formation of the Moon. Eventually things started to settle down and gases began to collect. High heat in Earths early days meant that there were constant volcanic eruptions, which released gases from the mantle into the atmosphere (see opening image). Just as today, volcanic outgassing was a source of water vapor, carbon dioxide, small amounts of nitrogen, and other gases. Scientists have calculated that the amount of gas that collected to form the early atmosphere could not have come entirely from volcanic eruptions. Frequent impacts by asteroids and comets brought in gases and ices, including water, carbon dioxide, methane, ammonia, nitrogen, and other volatiles from elsewhere in the solar system (Figure Calculations also show that asteroids and comets cannot be responsible for all of the gases of the early atmosphere, so both impacts and outgassing were needed. 	the gas that formed the early atmosphere came entirely from earths interior	false
With more oxygen in the atmosphere, ultraviolet radiation could create ozone. With the formation of an ozone layer to protect the surface of the Earth from UV radiation, more complex life forms could evolve. Banded-iron formation. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the early atmosphere didnt have oxygen because plants had not yet evolved	true
When photosynthesis evolved and spread around the planet, oxygen was released in abundance. The addition of oxygen is what created Earths third atmosphere. This event, which occurred about 2.5 billion years ago, is sometimes called the oxygen catastrophe because so many organisms died. Although entire species died out and went extinct, this event is also called the Great Oxygenation Event because it was a great opportunity. The organisms that survived developed a use for oxygen through cellular respiration, the process by which cells can obtain energy from organic molecules. This opened up many opportunities for organisms to evolve to fill different niches and many new types of organisms first appeared on Earth. 	the great oxygenation event occurred when animals became common	false
The presence of marine organisms in a rock indicates that the region where the rock was deposited was once marine. Sometimes fossils of marine organisms are found on tall mountains indicating that rocks that formed on the seabed were uplifted. 	finding clam shells in a rock indicates that the region was once shallow marine	true
An index fossil can be used to identify a specific period of time. Organisms that make good index fossils are distinctive, widespread, and lived briefly. Their presence in a rock layer can be used to identify rocks that were deposited at that period of time over a large area. The fossil of a juvenile mammoth found near downtown San Jose California reveals an enormous amount about these majestic creatures: what they looked like, how they lived, and what the environment of the Bay Area was like so long ago. 	an index fossil must be distinctive widespread and shortlived so that it can identify a specific period of time	true
At the planets center lies a dense metallic core. Scientists know that the core is metal because: 1. The density of Earths surface layers is much less than the overall density of the planet, as calculated from the planets rotation. If the surface layers are less dense than average, then the interior must be denser than average. Calculations indicate that the core is about 85% iron metal with nickel metal making up much of the remaining 15%. 2. Metallic meteorites are thought to be representative of the core. The 85% iron/15% nickel calculation above is also seen in metallic meteorites (Figure 1.1). If Earths core were not metal, the planet would not have a magnetic field. Metals such as iron are magnetic, but rock, which makes up the mantle and crust, is not. Scientists know that the outer core is liquid and the inner core is solid because: 1. S-waves do not go through the outer core. 2. The strong magnetic field is caused by convection in the liquid outer core. Convection currents in the outer core are due to heat from the even hotter inner core. The heat that keeps the outer core from solidifying is produced by the breakdown of radioactive elements in the inner core. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the core is less dense than the surface layers	false
At the planets center lies a dense metallic core. Scientists know that the core is metal because: 1. The density of Earths surface layers is much less than the overall density of the planet, as calculated from the planets rotation. If the surface layers are less dense than average, then the interior must be denser than average. Calculations indicate that the core is about 85% iron metal with nickel metal making up much of the remaining 15%. 2. Metallic meteorites are thought to be representative of the core. The 85% iron/15% nickel calculation above is also seen in metallic meteorites (Figure 1.1). If Earths core were not metal, the planet would not have a magnetic field. Metals such as iron are magnetic, but rock, which makes up the mantle and crust, is not. Scientists know that the outer core is liquid and the inner core is solid because: 1. S-waves do not go through the outer core. 2. The strong magnetic field is caused by convection in the liquid outer core. Convection currents in the outer core are due to heat from the even hotter inner core. The heat that keeps the outer core from solidifying is produced by the breakdown of radioactive elements in the inner core. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	scientists believe that metallic meteorites are representative of the core	true
At the planets center lies a dense metallic core. Scientists know that the core is metal because: 1. The density of Earths surface layers is much less than the overall density of the planet, as calculated from the planets rotation. If the surface layers are less dense than average, then the interior must be denser than average. Calculations indicate that the core is about 85% iron metal with nickel metal making up much of the remaining 15%. 2. Metallic meteorites are thought to be representative of the core. The 85% iron/15% nickel calculation above is also seen in metallic meteorites (Figure 1.1). If Earths core were not metal, the planet would not have a magnetic field. Metals such as iron are magnetic, but rock, which makes up the mantle and crust, is not. Scientists know that the outer core is liquid and the inner core is solid because: 1. S-waves do not go through the outer core. 2. The strong magnetic field is caused by convection in the liquid outer core. Convection currents in the outer core are due to heat from the even hotter inner core. The heat that keeps the outer core from solidifying is produced by the breakdown of radioactive elements in the inner core. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	seismic waves indicate that the inner core is a solid and the outer core is a liquid	true
Use this resource to answer the questions that follow. Click image to the left for more content. 1. What are fossils? 2. What type of rocks are fossils found in? 3. What are sediments? 4. Explain how a fossil is created. 5. What factors have exposed sedimentary rock? 	scientists learn about earths interior from seismic waves rocks and calculations of density and magnetism	true
It wasnt always known that fossils were parts of living organisms. In 1666, a young doctor named Nicholas Steno dissected the head of an enormous great white shark that had been caught by fisherman near Florence, Italy. Steno was struck by the resemblance of the sharks teeth to fossils found in inland mountains and hills (Figure ??). Most people at the time did not believe that fossils were once part of living creatures. Authors in that day thought that the fossils of marine animals found in tall mountains, miles from any ocean could be explained in one of two ways: The shells were washed up during the Biblical flood. (This explanation could not account for the fact that fossils were not only found on mountains, but also within mountains, in rocks that had been quarried from deep below Earths surface.) The fossils formed within the rocks as a result of mysterious forces. But for Steno, the close resemblance between fossils and modern organisms was impossible to ignore. Instead of invoking supernatural forces, Steno concluded that fossils were once parts of living creatures. 	iron and nickel are both magnetic	true
Unusual circumstances may lead to the preservation of a variety of fossils, as at the La Brea Tar Pits in Los Angeles, California. Although the animals trapped in the La Brea Tar Pits probably suffered a slow, miserable death, their bones were preserved perfectly by the sticky tar. (Figure ??). In spite of the difficulties of preservation, billions of fossils have been discovered, examined, and identified by thousands of scientists. The fossil record is our best clue to the history of life on Earth, and an important indicator of past climates and geological conditions as well. 	we cant travel to the center of the earth in a volcanic tube because the pressure is so great it would close any tube that existed	true
Earth is surrounded by a magnetic field (Figure 1.1) that behaves as if the planet had a gigantic bar magnet inside of it. Earths magnetic field also has a north and south pole. The magnetic field arises from the convection of molten iron and nickel metals in Earths liquid outer core. 	sometimes earths magnetic north pole becomes its magnetic south pole and vice versa	true
Many times during Earth history, even relatively recent Earth history, the planets magnetic field has flipped. That is, the north pole becomes the south pole and the south pole becomes the north pole. Scientists are not sure why this happens. One hypothesis is that the convection that drives the magnetic field becomes chaotic and then reverses itself. Another hypothesis is that an external event, such as an asteroid impact, disrupts motions in the core and causes the reversal. The first hypothesis is supported by computer models, but the second does not seem to be supported by much data. There is little correlation between impact events and magnetic reversals. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Earths magnetic field is like a bar magnet resides in the center of the planet. 	scientists model magnetic reversals to try to determine why they occur	true
Earth is surrounded by a magnetic field (Figure 1.1) that behaves as if the planet had a gigantic bar magnet inside of it. Earths magnetic field also has a north and south pole. The magnetic field arises from the convection of molten iron and nickel metals in Earths liquid outer core. 	earths magnetic field has disappeared for long periods of time in earth history	false
Earth is surrounded by a magnetic field (Figure 1.1) that behaves as if the planet had a gigantic bar magnet inside of it. Earths magnetic field also has a north and south pole. The magnetic field arises from the convection of molten iron and nickel metals in Earths liquid outer core. 	without earths magnetic field complex life could probably not exist	true
Earth is a sphere or, more correctly, an oblate spheroid, which is a sphere that is a bit squished down at the poles and bulges a bit at the Equator. To be more technical, the minor axis (the diameter through the poles) is smaller than the major axis (the diameter through the Equator). Half of the sphere is a hemisphere. North of the Equator is the northern hemisphere and south of the Equator is the southern hemisphere. Eastern and western hemispheres are also designated. What evidence is there that Earth is spherical? What evidence was there before spaceships and satellites? Try to design an experiment involving a ship and the ocean to show Earth is round. If you are standing on the shore and a ship is going out to sea, the ship gets smaller as it moves further away from you. The ships bottom also starts to disappear as the vessel goes around the arc of the planet (Figure 1.1). There are many other ways that early scientists and mariners knew that Earth was not flat. The Sun and the other planets of the solar system are also spherical. Larger satellites, those that have enough mass for their gravitational attraction to have made them round, are spherical as well. Earths actual shape is not spherical but an oblate spheroid. The planet bulges around the equator due to mass collecting in the middle due to rotational momentum. 	it wasnt until johannes kepler that people realized that earth was round	false
Earth is a sphere or, more correctly, an oblate spheroid, which is a sphere that is a bit squished down at the poles and bulges a bit at the Equator. To be more technical, the minor axis (the diameter through the poles) is smaller than the major axis (the diameter through the Equator). Half of the sphere is a hemisphere. North of the Equator is the northern hemisphere and south of the Equator is the southern hemisphere. Eastern and western hemispheres are also designated. What evidence is there that Earth is spherical? What evidence was there before spaceships and satellites? Try to design an experiment involving a ship and the ocean to show Earth is round. If you are standing on the shore and a ship is going out to sea, the ship gets smaller as it moves further away from you. The ships bottom also starts to disappear as the vessel goes around the arc of the planet (Figure 1.1). There are many other ways that early scientists and mariners knew that Earth was not flat. The Sun and the other planets of the solar system are also spherical. Larger satellites, those that have enough mass for their gravitational attraction to have made them round, are spherical as well. Earths actual shape is not spherical but an oblate spheroid. The planet bulges around the equator due to mass collecting in the middle due to rotational momentum. 	earths shape is a bit squished at the poles and bulges at the equator	true
Earth is a sphere or, more correctly, an oblate spheroid, which is a sphere that is a bit squished down at the poles and bulges a bit at the Equator. To be more technical, the minor axis (the diameter through the poles) is smaller than the major axis (the diameter through the Equator). Half of the sphere is a hemisphere. North of the Equator is the northern hemisphere and south of the Equator is the southern hemisphere. Eastern and western hemispheres are also designated. What evidence is there that Earth is spherical? What evidence was there before spaceships and satellites? Try to design an experiment involving a ship and the ocean to show Earth is round. If you are standing on the shore and a ship is going out to sea, the ship gets smaller as it moves further away from you. The ships bottom also starts to disappear as the vessel goes around the arc of the planet (Figure 1.1). There are many other ways that early scientists and mariners knew that Earth was not flat. The Sun and the other planets of the solar system are also spherical. Larger satellites, those that have enough mass for their gravitational attraction to have made them round, are spherical as well. Earths actual shape is not spherical but an oblate spheroid. The planet bulges around the equator due to mass collecting in the middle due to rotational momentum. 	earths minor axis is the diameter through its poles	true
Earth is a sphere or, more correctly, an oblate spheroid, which is a sphere that is a bit squished down at the poles and bulges a bit at the Equator. To be more technical, the minor axis (the diameter through the poles) is smaller than the major axis (the diameter through the Equator). Half of the sphere is a hemisphere. North of the Equator is the northern hemisphere and south of the Equator is the southern hemisphere. Eastern and western hemispheres are also designated. What evidence is there that Earth is spherical? What evidence was there before spaceships and satellites? Try to design an experiment involving a ship and the ocean to show Earth is round. If you are standing on the shore and a ship is going out to sea, the ship gets smaller as it moves further away from you. The ships bottom also starts to disappear as the vessel goes around the arc of the planet (Figure 1.1). There are many other ways that early scientists and mariners knew that Earth was not flat. The Sun and the other planets of the solar system are also spherical. Larger satellites, those that have enough mass for their gravitational attraction to have made them round, are spherical as well. Earths actual shape is not spherical but an oblate spheroid. The planet bulges around the equator due to mass collecting in the middle due to rotational momentum. 	the diameter through the poles is larger than the diameter through the equator	false
A solar eclipse occurs when the new Moon passes directly between the Earth and the Sun (Figure 1.1). This casts a shadow on the Earth and blocks Earths view of the Sun. A total solar eclipse occurs when the Moons shadow completely blocks the Sun (Figure 1.2). When only a portion of the Sun is out of view, it is called a partial solar eclipse. Solar eclipses are rare and usually only last a few minutes because the Moon casts only a small shadow (Figure 1.3). As the Sun is covered by the Moons shadow, it will actually get cooler outside. Birds may begin to sing, and stars will become visible in the sky. During a solar eclipse, the corona and solar prominences can be seen. A solar eclipse occurs when the Moon passes between Earth and the Sun in such a way that the Sun is either partially or totally hidden from view. Some people, including some scientists, chase eclipses all over the world to learn or just observe this amazing phenomenon. A solar eclipse shown as a series of pho- tos. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	a solar eclipse occurs when the moons shadow completely blocks the sun	true
A solar eclipse occurs when the new Moon passes directly between the Earth and the Sun (Figure 1.1). This casts a shadow on the Earth and blocks Earths view of the Sun. A total solar eclipse occurs when the Moons shadow completely blocks the Sun (Figure 1.2). When only a portion of the Sun is out of view, it is called a partial solar eclipse. Solar eclipses are rare and usually only last a few minutes because the Moon casts only a small shadow (Figure 1.3). As the Sun is covered by the Moons shadow, it will actually get cooler outside. Birds may begin to sing, and stars will become visible in the sky. During a solar eclipse, the corona and solar prominences can be seen. A solar eclipse occurs when the Moon passes between Earth and the Sun in such a way that the Sun is either partially or totally hidden from view. Some people, including some scientists, chase eclipses all over the world to learn or just observe this amazing phenomenon. A solar eclipse shown as a series of pho- tos. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	solar eclipses last only a few minutes because the moon casts a small shadow	true
A solar eclipse occurs when the new Moon passes directly between the Earth and the Sun (Figure 1.1). This casts a shadow on the Earth and blocks Earths view of the Sun. A total solar eclipse occurs when the Moons shadow completely blocks the Sun (Figure 1.2). When only a portion of the Sun is out of view, it is called a partial solar eclipse. Solar eclipses are rare and usually only last a few minutes because the Moon casts only a small shadow (Figure 1.3). As the Sun is covered by the Moons shadow, it will actually get cooler outside. Birds may begin to sing, and stars will become visible in the sky. During a solar eclipse, the corona and solar prominences can be seen. A solar eclipse occurs when the Moon passes between Earth and the Sun in such a way that the Sun is either partially or totally hidden from view. Some people, including some scientists, chase eclipses all over the world to learn or just observe this amazing phenomenon. A solar eclipse shown as a series of pho- tos. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	during a lunar eclipse darkness in the middle of the day may cause temperatures to cool and stars to become visible	false
A lunar eclipse occurs when the full moon moves through Earths shadow, which only happens when Earth is between the Moon and the Sun and all three are lined up in the same plane, called the ecliptic (Figure 1.4). In an eclipse, Earths shadow has two distinct parts: the umbra and the penumbra. The umbra is the inner, cone-shaped part of the shadow, in which all of the light has been blocked. The penumbra is the outer part of Earths shadow where only part of the light is blocked. In the penumbra, the light is dimmed but not totally absent. A total lunar eclipse occurs when the Moon travels completely in Earths umbra. During a partial lunar eclipse, only a portion of the Moon enters Earths umbra. Earths shadow is large enough that a lunar eclipse lasts for hours and can be seen by any part of Earth with a view of the Moon at the time of the eclipse (Figure 1.5). A lunar eclipse does not occur every month because Moons orbit is inclined 5-degrees to Earths orbit, so the two bodies are not in the same plane every month. 	the penumbra is the inner coneshaped part of the shadow in which all light has been blocked	false
Many factors influence the climate of a region. The most important factor is latitude because different latitudes receive different amounts of solar radiation. The Equator receives the most solar radiation. Days are equally long year-round and the Sun is just about directly overhead at midday. The polar regions receive the least solar radiation. The night lasts six months during the winter. Even in summer, the Sun never rises very high in the sky. Sunlight filters through a thick wedge of atmosphere, making the sunlight much less intense. The high albedo, because of ice and snow, reflects a good portion of the Suns light. 	the polar regions receive the most solar radiation because their summer days are 6 month long	false
Many factors influence the climate of a region. The most important factor is latitude because different latitudes receive different amounts of solar radiation. The Equator receives the most solar radiation. Days are equally long year-round and the Sun is just about directly overhead at midday. The polar regions receive the least solar radiation. The night lasts six months during the winter. Even in summer, the Sun never rises very high in the sky. Sunlight filters through a thick wedge of atmosphere, making the sunlight much less intense. The high albedo, because of ice and snow, reflects a good portion of the Suns light. 	the number of hours of daylight is equal all year long at the equator	true
Many factors influence the climate of a region. The most important factor is latitude because different latitudes receive different amounts of solar radiation. The Equator receives the most solar radiation. Days are equally long year-round and the Sun is just about directly overhead at midday. The polar regions receive the least solar radiation. The night lasts six months during the winter. Even in summer, the Sun never rises very high in the sky. Sunlight filters through a thick wedge of atmosphere, making the sunlight much less intense. The high albedo, because of ice and snow, reflects a good portion of the Suns light. 	latitude is the only factor that determines the temperature of a region	false
Many factors influence the climate of a region. The most important factor is latitude because different latitudes receive different amounts of solar radiation. The Equator receives the most solar radiation. Days are equally long year-round and the Sun is just about directly overhead at midday. The polar regions receive the least solar radiation. The night lasts six months during the winter. Even in summer, the Sun never rises very high in the sky. Sunlight filters through a thick wedge of atmosphere, making the sunlight much less intense. The high albedo, because of ice and snow, reflects a good portion of the Suns light. 	at the equator the sun is just about directly overhead at midday	true
Human health suffers in locations with high levels of air pollution. 	scientists are certain that the increase in air pollution is causing the increase in lung cancer	false
Human health suffers in locations with high levels of air pollution. 	a person exposed to air pollution is more likely to get lung cancer	true
Different pollutants have different health effects: Lead is the most common toxic material and is responsible for lead poisoning. Carbon monoxide can kill people in poorly ventilated spaces, such as tunnels. Nitrogen and sulfur-oxides cause lung disease and increased rates of asthma, emphysema, and viral infections such as the flu. Ozone damages the human respiratory system, causing lung disease. High ozone levels are also associated with increased heart disease and cancer. Particulates enter the lungs and cause heart or lung disease. When particulate levels are high, asthma attacks are more common. By some estimates, 30,000 deaths a year in the United States are caused by fine particle pollution. 	breathing air into which weve emitted pollutants is not much different from throwing trash in our food supply and eating it	true
Human health suffers in locations with high levels of air pollution. 	according to one study no amount of air pollution is safe to breathe	true
Energy travels through space or material. This is obvious when you stand near a fire and feel its warmth or when you pick up the handle of a metal pot even though the handle is not sitting directly on the hot stove. Invisible energy waves can travel through air, glass, and even the vacuum of outer space. These waves have electrical and magnetic properties, so they are called electromagnetic waves. The transfer of energy from one object to another through electromagnetic waves is known as radiation. Different wavelengths of energy create different types of electromagnetic waves (Figure 1.1). The wavelengths humans can see are known as visible light. When viewed together, all of the wavelengths of visible light appear white. But a prism or water droplets can break the white light into different wavelengths so that separate colors appear (Figure 1.2). What objects can you think of that radiate visible light? Two include the Sun and a light bulb. The longest wavelengths of visible light appear red. Infrared wavelengths are longer than visible red. Snakes can see infrared energy. We feel infrared energy as heat. Wavelengths that are shorter than violet are called ultraviolet. Can you think of some objects that appear to radiate visible light, but actually do not? The Moon and the planets do not emit light of their own; they reflect the light of the Sun. Reflection is when light (or another wave) bounces back from a surface. Albedo is a measure of how well a surface reflects light. A surface with high albedo reflects a large percentage of light. A snow field has high albedo. One important fact to remember is that energy cannot be created or destroyed  it can only be changed from one form to another. This is such a fundamental fact of nature that it is a law: the law of conservation of energy. In photosynthesis, for example, plants convert solar energy into chemical energy that they can use. They do not create new energy. When energy is transformed, some nearly always becomes heat. Heat transfers between materials easily, from warmer objects to cooler ones. If no more heat is added, eventually all of a material will reach the same temperature. 	radiation transfers energy by electromagnetic waves	true
Energy travels through space or material. This is obvious when you stand near a fire and feel its warmth or when you pick up the handle of a metal pot even though the handle is not sitting directly on the hot stove. Invisible energy waves can travel through air, glass, and even the vacuum of outer space. These waves have electrical and magnetic properties, so they are called electromagnetic waves. The transfer of energy from one object to another through electromagnetic waves is known as radiation. Different wavelengths of energy create different types of electromagnetic waves (Figure 1.1). The wavelengths humans can see are known as visible light. When viewed together, all of the wavelengths of visible light appear white. But a prism or water droplets can break the white light into different wavelengths so that separate colors appear (Figure 1.2). What objects can you think of that radiate visible light? Two include the Sun and a light bulb. The longest wavelengths of visible light appear red. Infrared wavelengths are longer than visible red. Snakes can see infrared energy. We feel infrared energy as heat. Wavelengths that are shorter than violet are called ultraviolet. Can you think of some objects that appear to radiate visible light, but actually do not? The Moon and the planets do not emit light of their own; they reflect the light of the Sun. Reflection is when light (or another wave) bounces back from a surface. Albedo is a measure of how well a surface reflects light. A surface with high albedo reflects a large percentage of light. A snow field has high albedo. One important fact to remember is that energy cannot be created or destroyed  it can only be changed from one form to another. This is such a fundamental fact of nature that it is a law: the law of conservation of energy. In photosynthesis, for example, plants convert solar energy into chemical energy that they can use. They do not create new energy. When energy is transformed, some nearly always becomes heat. Heat transfers between materials easily, from warmer objects to cooler ones. If no more heat is added, eventually all of a material will reach the same temperature. 	violet light has the longest wavelengths for visible light	false
Energy travels through space or material. This is obvious when you stand near a fire and feel its warmth or when you pick up the handle of a metal pot even though the handle is not sitting directly on the hot stove. Invisible energy waves can travel through air, glass, and even the vacuum of outer space. These waves have electrical and magnetic properties, so they are called electromagnetic waves. The transfer of energy from one object to another through electromagnetic waves is known as radiation. Different wavelengths of energy create different types of electromagnetic waves (Figure 1.1). The wavelengths humans can see are known as visible light. When viewed together, all of the wavelengths of visible light appear white. But a prism or water droplets can break the white light into different wavelengths so that separate colors appear (Figure 1.2). What objects can you think of that radiate visible light? Two include the Sun and a light bulb. The longest wavelengths of visible light appear red. Infrared wavelengths are longer than visible red. Snakes can see infrared energy. We feel infrared energy as heat. Wavelengths that are shorter than violet are called ultraviolet. Can you think of some objects that appear to radiate visible light, but actually do not? The Moon and the planets do not emit light of their own; they reflect the light of the Sun. Reflection is when light (or another wave) bounces back from a surface. Albedo is a measure of how well a surface reflects light. A surface with high albedo reflects a large percentage of light. A snow field has high albedo. One important fact to remember is that energy cannot be created or destroyed  it can only be changed from one form to another. This is such a fundamental fact of nature that it is a law: the law of conservation of energy. In photosynthesis, for example, plants convert solar energy into chemical energy that they can use. They do not create new energy. When energy is transformed, some nearly always becomes heat. Heat transfers between materials easily, from warmer objects to cooler ones. If no more heat is added, eventually all of a material will reach the same temperature. 	plants convert solar energy to chemical energy	true
Energy travels through space or material. This is obvious when you stand near a fire and feel its warmth or when you pick up the handle of a metal pot even though the handle is not sitting directly on the hot stove. Invisible energy waves can travel through air, glass, and even the vacuum of outer space. These waves have electrical and magnetic properties, so they are called electromagnetic waves. The transfer of energy from one object to another through electromagnetic waves is known as radiation. Different wavelengths of energy create different types of electromagnetic waves (Figure 1.1). The wavelengths humans can see are known as visible light. When viewed together, all of the wavelengths of visible light appear white. But a prism or water droplets can break the white light into different wavelengths so that separate colors appear (Figure 1.2). What objects can you think of that radiate visible light? Two include the Sun and a light bulb. The longest wavelengths of visible light appear red. Infrared wavelengths are longer than visible red. Snakes can see infrared energy. We feel infrared energy as heat. Wavelengths that are shorter than violet are called ultraviolet. Can you think of some objects that appear to radiate visible light, but actually do not? The Moon and the planets do not emit light of their own; they reflect the light of the Sun. Reflection is when light (or another wave) bounces back from a surface. Albedo is a measure of how well a surface reflects light. A surface with high albedo reflects a large percentage of light. A snow field has high albedo. One important fact to remember is that energy cannot be created or destroyed  it can only be changed from one form to another. This is such a fundamental fact of nature that it is a law: the law of conservation of energy. In photosynthesis, for example, plants convert solar energy into chemical energy that they can use. They do not create new energy. When energy is transformed, some nearly always becomes heat. Heat transfers between materials easily, from warmer objects to cooler ones. If no more heat is added, eventually all of a material will reach the same temperature. 	a snow field has a low albedo	false
Everyone can reduce their use of energy resources and the pollution the resources cause by conserving energy. Conservation means saving resources by using them more efficiently, using less of them, or not using them at all. You can read below about some of the ways you can conserve energy on the road and in the home. 	conserving energy is cleaner and cheaper than finding new energy	true
Everyone can reduce their use of energy resources and the pollution the resources cause by conserving energy. Conservation means saving resources by using them more efficiently, using less of them, or not using them at all. You can read below about some of the ways you can conserve energy on the road and in the home. 	using energy more efficiently will help our energy resources last a longer time	true
Biomass is the material that comes from plants and animals that were recently living. Biomass can be burned directly, such as setting fire to wood. For as long as humans have had fire, people have used biomass for heating and cooking. People can also process biomass to make fuel, called biofuel. Biofuel can be created from crops, such as corn or Biofuels, such as ethanol, are added to gasoline to cut down the amount of fossil fuels that are used. algae, and processed for use in a car (Figure 1.1). The advantage to biofuels is that they burn more cleanly than fossil fuels. As a result, they create less pollution and less carbon dioxide. Organic material, like almond shells, can be made into electricity. Biomass power is a great use of wastes and is more reliable than other renewable energy sources, but harvesting biomass energy uses energy and biomass plants produce pollutants including greenhouse gases. Cow manure can have a second life as a source of methane gas, which can be converted to electricity. Not only that food scraps can also be converted into green energy. Food that is tossed out produces methane, a potent greenhouse gas. But that methane from leftovers can be harnessed and used as fuel. Sounds like a win-win situation. 	fossil fuels burn cleaner than biofuels	false
Biomass is the material that comes from plants and animals that were recently living. Biomass can be burned directly, such as setting fire to wood. For as long as humans have had fire, people have used biomass for heating and cooking. People can also process biomass to make fuel, called biofuel. Biofuel can be created from crops, such as corn or Biofuels, such as ethanol, are added to gasoline to cut down the amount of fossil fuels that are used. algae, and processed for use in a car (Figure 1.1). The advantage to biofuels is that they burn more cleanly than fossil fuels. As a result, they create less pollution and less carbon dioxide. Organic material, like almond shells, can be made into electricity. Biomass power is a great use of wastes and is more reliable than other renewable energy sources, but harvesting biomass energy uses energy and biomass plants produce pollutants including greenhouse gases. Cow manure can have a second life as a source of methane gas, which can be converted to electricity. Not only that food scraps can also be converted into green energy. Food that is tossed out produces methane, a potent greenhouse gas. But that methane from leftovers can be harnessed and used as fuel. Sounds like a win-win situation. 	cow manure can be a source of methane gas which can be converted to electricity	true
In many instances, the amount of energy, fertilizer, and land needed to produce the crops used make biofuels mean that they often produce very little more energy than they consume. The fertilizers and pesticides used to grow the crops run off and become damaging pollutants in nearby water bodies or in the oceans. To generate biomass energy, break down the cell walls of plants to release the sugars and then ferment those sugars to create fuel. Corn is a very inefficient source; scientists are looking for much better sources of biomass energy. 	biomass from which sugars are released and fermented create fuel	true
Biomass is the material that comes from plants and animals that were recently living. Biomass can be burned directly, such as setting fire to wood. For as long as humans have had fire, people have used biomass for heating and cooking. People can also process biomass to make fuel, called biofuel. Biofuel can be created from crops, such as corn or Biofuels, such as ethanol, are added to gasoline to cut down the amount of fossil fuels that are used. algae, and processed for use in a car (Figure 1.1). The advantage to biofuels is that they burn more cleanly than fossil fuels. As a result, they create less pollution and less carbon dioxide. Organic material, like almond shells, can be made into electricity. Biomass power is a great use of wastes and is more reliable than other renewable energy sources, but harvesting biomass energy uses energy and biomass plants produce pollutants including greenhouse gases. Cow manure can have a second life as a source of methane gas, which can be converted to electricity. Not only that food scraps can also be converted into green energy. Food that is tossed out produces methane, a potent greenhouse gas. But that methane from leftovers can be harnessed and used as fuel. Sounds like a win-win situation. 	wood has been one of the oldest fuels used for warmth or to cook food	true
Look at the circle graph in the Figure 1.1. It shows that oil is the single most commonly used energy resource in the U.S., followed by natural gas, and then by coal. All of these energy resources are nonrenewable. Nonrenewable resources are resources that are limited in supply and cannot be replaced as quickly as they are used up. Renewable resources, in contrast, provide only 8 percent of all energy used in the U.S. Renewable resources are natural resources that can be replaced in a relatively short period of time or are virtually limitless in supply. They include solar energy from sunlight, geothermal energy from under Earths surface, wind, biomass (from once-living things or their wastes), and hydropower (from running water). 	all of the energy resources listed in question 1 are nonrenewable resources	true
Look at the circle graph in the Figure 1.1. It shows that oil is the single most commonly used energy resource in the U.S., followed by natural gas, and then by coal. All of these energy resources are nonrenewable. Nonrenewable resources are resources that are limited in supply and cannot be replaced as quickly as they are used up. Renewable resources, in contrast, provide only 8 percent of all energy used in the U.S. Renewable resources are natural resources that can be replaced in a relatively short period of time or are virtually limitless in supply. They include solar energy from sunlight, geothermal energy from under Earths surface, wind, biomass (from once-living things or their wastes), and hydropower (from running water). 	in the us the most commonly used renewable energy resource is solar energy	false
People in the U.S. use far more energyespecially energy from oilthan people in any other nation. The bar graph in the Figure 1.2 compares the amount of oil used by the top ten oil-using nations. The U.S. uses more oil than several other top-ten countries combined. If you also consider the population size in these countries, the differences are even more stunning. The average person in the U.S. uses a whopping 23 barrels of oil a year! In comparison, the average person in India or China uses just 1 or 2 barrels of oil a year. Q: How does the use of oil and other fossil fuels relate to pollution? A: Greater use of oil and other fossil fuels causes more pollution. 	people in the us use far more energy per person than people in any other country	true
Although mining provides people with many needed resources, the environmental costs can be high. Surface mining clears the landscape of trees and soil, and nearby streams and lakes are inundated with sediment. Pollutants from the mined rock, such as heavy metals, enter the sediment and water system. Acids flow from some mine sites, changing the composition of nearby waterways (Figure 1.1). U.S. law has changed in recent decades so that a mine region must be restored to its natural state, a process called reclamation. This is not true of older mines. Pits may be refilled or reshaped and vegetation planted. Pits may be allowed to fill with water and become lakes or may be turned into landfills. Underground mines may be sealed off or left open as homes for bats. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Acid drainage from a surface coal mine in Missouri. 	acid flowing from coal mines in missouri polluted the water and land	true
Although mining provides people with many needed resources, the environmental costs can be high. Surface mining clears the landscape of trees and soil, and nearby streams and lakes are inundated with sediment. Pollutants from the mined rock, such as heavy metals, enter the sediment and water system. Acids flow from some mine sites, changing the composition of nearby waterways (Figure 1.1). U.S. law has changed in recent decades so that a mine region must be restored to its natural state, a process called reclamation. This is not true of older mines. Pits may be refilled or reshaped and vegetation planted. Pits may be allowed to fill with water and become lakes or may be turned into landfills. Underground mines may be sealed off or left open as homes for bats. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Acid drainage from a surface coal mine in Missouri. 	older mines must also be reclaimed by us law	false
Although mining provides people with many needed resources, the environmental costs can be high. Surface mining clears the landscape of trees and soil, and nearby streams and lakes are inundated with sediment. Pollutants from the mined rock, such as heavy metals, enter the sediment and water system. Acids flow from some mine sites, changing the composition of nearby waterways (Figure 1.1). U.S. law has changed in recent decades so that a mine region must be restored to its natural state, a process called reclamation. This is not true of older mines. Pits may be refilled or reshaped and vegetation planted. Pits may be allowed to fill with water and become lakes or may be turned into landfills. Underground mines may be sealed off or left open as homes for bats. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Acid drainage from a surface coal mine in Missouri. 	personal electronics are full of metals and other substances that come from mining	true
Although mining provides people with many needed resources, the environmental costs can be high. Surface mining clears the landscape of trees and soil, and nearby streams and lakes are inundated with sediment. Pollutants from the mined rock, such as heavy metals, enter the sediment and water system. Acids flow from some mine sites, changing the composition of nearby waterways (Figure 1.1). U.S. law has changed in recent decades so that a mine region must be restored to its natural state, a process called reclamation. This is not true of older mines. Pits may be refilled or reshaped and vegetation planted. Pits may be allowed to fill with water and become lakes or may be turned into landfills. Underground mines may be sealed off or left open as homes for bats. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Acid drainage from a surface coal mine in Missouri. 	heavy metals are among the pollutants that can come off a mine	true
Since the early 1990s, astronomers have discovered other solar systems, with planets orbiting stars other than our own Sun. These are called "extrasolar planets" or simply exoplanets (see Figure 1.1). Exoplanets are not in our solar system, but are found in other solar systems. Some extrasolar planets have been directly imaged, but most have been discovered by indirect methods. One technique involves detecting the very slight motion of a star periodically moving toward and away from us along our line-of-sight (also known as a stars "radial velocity"). This periodic motion can be attributed to the gravitational pull of a planet or, sometimes, another star orbiting the star. A planet may also be identified by measuring a stars brightness over time. A temporary, periodic decrease in light emitted from a star can occur when a planet crosses in front of, or "transits," the star it is orbiting, momentarily blocking out some of the starlight. More than 1800 extrasolar planets have been identified and confirmed and the rate of discovery is increasing rapidly. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	there have been more than 1800 exoplanets identified and confirmed	true
Since the early 1990s, astronomers have discovered other solar systems, with planets orbiting stars other than our own Sun. These are called "extrasolar planets" or simply exoplanets (see Figure 1.1). Exoplanets are not in our solar system, but are found in other solar systems. Some extrasolar planets have been directly imaged, but most have been discovered by indirect methods. One technique involves detecting the very slight motion of a star periodically moving toward and away from us along our line-of-sight (also known as a stars "radial velocity"). This periodic motion can be attributed to the gravitational pull of a planet or, sometimes, another star orbiting the star. A planet may also be identified by measuring a stars brightness over time. A temporary, periodic decrease in light emitted from a star can occur when a planet crosses in front of, or "transits," the star it is orbiting, momentarily blocking out some of the starlight. More than 1800 extrasolar planets have been identified and confirmed and the rate of discovery is increasing rapidly. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	exoplanets orbit a star other than the sun	true
Since the early 1990s, astronomers have discovered other solar systems, with planets orbiting stars other than our own Sun. These are called "extrasolar planets" or simply exoplanets (see Figure 1.1). Exoplanets are not in our solar system, but are found in other solar systems. Some extrasolar planets have been directly imaged, but most have been discovered by indirect methods. One technique involves detecting the very slight motion of a star periodically moving toward and away from us along our line-of-sight (also known as a stars "radial velocity"). This periodic motion can be attributed to the gravitational pull of a planet or, sometimes, another star orbiting the star. A planet may also be identified by measuring a stars brightness over time. A temporary, periodic decrease in light emitted from a star can occur when a planet crosses in front of, or "transits," the star it is orbiting, momentarily blocking out some of the starlight. More than 1800 extrasolar planets have been identified and confirmed and the rate of discovery is increasing rapidly. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	new extrasolar planets are identified very rarely only about once per decade	false
Since the early 1990s, astronomers have discovered other solar systems, with planets orbiting stars other than our own Sun. These are called "extrasolar planets" or simply exoplanets (see Figure 1.1). Exoplanets are not in our solar system, but are found in other solar systems. Some extrasolar planets have been directly imaged, but most have been discovered by indirect methods. One technique involves detecting the very slight motion of a star periodically moving toward and away from us along our line-of-sight (also known as a stars "radial velocity"). This periodic motion can be attributed to the gravitational pull of a planet or, sometimes, another star orbiting the star. A planet may also be identified by measuring a stars brightness over time. A temporary, periodic decrease in light emitted from a star can occur when a planet crosses in front of, or "transits," the star it is orbiting, momentarily blocking out some of the starlight. More than 1800 extrasolar planets have been identified and confirmed and the rate of discovery is increasing rapidly. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	according to statistical studies the milky way galaxy may contain about 100 billion planets	false
After discovering that there are galaxies beyond the Milky Way, Edwin Hubble went on to measure the distance to hundreds of other galaxies. His data would eventually show how the universe is changing, and would even yield clues as to how the universe formed. 	the universe is expanding in threedimensions	true
If you look at a star through a prism, you will see a spectrum, or a range of colors through the rainbow. The spectrum will have specific dark bands where elements in the star absorb light of certain energies. By examining the arrangement of these dark absorption lines, astronomers can determine the composition of elements that make up a distant star. In fact, the element helium was first discovered in our Sun  not on Earth  by analyzing the absorption lines in the spectrum of the Sun. While studying the spectrum of light from distant galaxies, astronomers noticed something strange. The dark lines in the spectrum were in the patterns they expected, but they were shifted toward the red end of the spectrum, as shown in Figure 1.1. This shift of absorption bands toward the red end of the spectrum is known as redshift. Redshift is a shift in absorption bands toward the red end of the spectrum. What could make the absorption bands of a star shift toward the red? Redshift occurs when the light source is moving away from the observer or when the space between the observer and the source is stretched. What does it mean that stars and galaxies are redshifted? When astronomers see redshift in the light from a galaxy, they know that the galaxy is moving away from Earth. If galaxies were moving randomly, would some be redshifted but others be blueshifted? Of course. Since almost every galaxy in the universe has a redshift, almost every galaxy is moving away from Earth. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	astronomers determine the composition of a star by examining the dark absorption lines	true
If you look at a star through a prism, you will see a spectrum, or a range of colors through the rainbow. The spectrum will have specific dark bands where elements in the star absorb light of certain energies. By examining the arrangement of these dark absorption lines, astronomers can determine the composition of elements that make up a distant star. In fact, the element helium was first discovered in our Sun  not on Earth  by analyzing the absorption lines in the spectrum of the Sun. While studying the spectrum of light from distant galaxies, astronomers noticed something strange. The dark lines in the spectrum were in the patterns they expected, but they were shifted toward the red end of the spectrum, as shown in Figure 1.1. This shift of absorption bands toward the red end of the spectrum is known as redshift. Redshift is a shift in absorption bands toward the red end of the spectrum. What could make the absorption bands of a star shift toward the red? Redshift occurs when the light source is moving away from the observer or when the space between the observer and the source is stretched. What does it mean that stars and galaxies are redshifted? When astronomers see redshift in the light from a galaxy, they know that the galaxy is moving away from Earth. If galaxies were moving randomly, would some be redshifted but others be blueshifted? Of course. Since almost every galaxy in the universe has a redshift, almost every galaxy is moving away from Earth. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	if a galaxy is moving closer to earth it would have a blueshift	true
After discovering that there are galaxies beyond the Milky Way, Edwin Hubble went on to measure the distance to hundreds of other galaxies. His data would eventually show how the universe is changing, and would even yield clues as to how the universe formed. 	as the universe expands the galaxies are also expanding	false
A rock under enough stress will fracture. There may or may not be movement along the fracture. 	horizontalappearing layers can have a younger rock below an older rock if they are separated by a thrust fault	true
There are two types of dip-slip faults. In a normal fault, the hanging wall drops down relative to the footwall. In a reverse fault, the footwall drops down relative to the hanging wall. This diagram illustrates the two types of dip-slip faults: normal faults and reverse faults. Imagine miners extracting a re- source along a fault. The hanging wall is where miners would have hung their lanterns. The footwall is where they would have walked. A thrust fault is a type of reverse fault in which the fault plane angle is nearly horizontal. Rocks can slip many miles along thrust faults (Figure 1.4). At Chief Mountain in Montana, the upper rocks at the Lewis Overthrust are more than 1 billion years older than the lower rocks. How could this happen? Normal faults can be huge. They are responsible for uplifting mountain ranges in regions experiencing tensional stress. 	in a normal fault the hanging wall goes up and the footwall goes down	false
People try to protect areas that might flood with dams, and dams are usually very effective. But high water levels sometimes cause a dam to break and then flooding can be catastrophic. People may also line a river bank with levees, high walls that keep the stream within its banks during floods. A levee in one location may just force the high water up or downstream and cause flooding there. The New Madrid Overflow in the Figure 1.2 was created with the recognition that the Mississippi River sometimes simply cannot be contained by levees and must be allowed to flood. 	flooding is often worse when vegetation is cleared	true
Flash floods are sudden and unexpected, taking place when very intense rains fall over a very brief period (Figure streambed. A 2004 flash flood in England devastated two villages when 3-1/2 inches of rain fell in 60 minutes. Pictured here is some of the damage from the flash flood. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	floods are relatively recent phenomenon only occurring since humans have altered the landscape	false
People try to protect areas that might flood with dams, and dams are usually very effective. But high water levels sometimes cause a dam to break and then flooding can be catastrophic. People may also line a river bank with levees, high walls that keep the stream within its banks during floods. A levee in one location may just force the high water up or downstream and cause flooding there. The New Madrid Overflow in the Figure 1.2 was created with the recognition that the Mississippi River sometimes simply cannot be contained by levees and must be allowed to flood. 	the lands downstream from a dam are safe from flooding	false
Anticline: An anticline is a fold that arches upward. The rocks dip away from the center of the fold (Figure 1.2). The oldest rocks are at the center of an anticline and the youngest are draped over them. When rocks arch upward to form a circular structure, that structure is called a dome. If the top of the dome is sliced off, where are the oldest rocks located? 	an anticline in three dimensions is a basin	false
Anticline: An anticline is a fold that arches upward. The rocks dip away from the center of the fold (Figure 1.2). The oldest rocks are at the center of an anticline and the youngest are draped over them. When rocks arch upward to form a circular structure, that structure is called a dome. If the top of the dome is sliced off, where are the oldest rocks located? 	a dome is a structure made when rocks arch upward	true
Rocks deforming plastically under compressive stresses crumple into folds. They do not return to their original shape. If the rocks experience more stress, they may undergo more folding or even fracture. You can see three types of folds. 	when rocks are bent into a fold they may go back to their original shape if the stress is released	false
Anticline: An anticline is a fold that arches upward. The rocks dip away from the center of the fold (Figure 1.2). The oldest rocks are at the center of an anticline and the youngest are draped over them. When rocks arch upward to form a circular structure, that structure is called a dome. If the top of the dome is sliced off, where are the oldest rocks located? 	in a syncline the youngest rocks are outside and the oldest rocks are in the center	false
Earth formed at the same time as the other planets. The history of Earth is part of the history of the Solar System. 	due to gravity planetoids got larger and larger until they became planets	true
Earth formed at the same time as the other planets. The history of Earth is part of the history of the Solar System. 	there was more radioactive decay early in earth history than now because many radioactive elements have long half lives	false
When Earth first came together it was really hot, hot enough to melt the metal elements that it contained. Earth was so hot for three reasons: Gravitational contraction: As small bodies of rock and metal accreted, the planet grew larger and more massive. Gravity within such an enormous body squeezes the material in its interior so hard that the pressure swells. As Earths internal pressure grew, its temperature also rose. Radioactive decay: Radioactive decay releases heat, and early in the planets history there were many ra- dioactive elements with short half lives. These elements long ago decayed into stable materials, but they were responsible for the release of enormous amounts of heat in the beginning. Bombardment: Ancient impact craters found on the Moon and inner planets indicate that asteroid impacts were common in the early solar system. Earth was struck so much in its first 500 million years that the heat was intense. Very few large objects have struck the planet in the past many hundreds of millions of year. 	gravity releases energy when material is squeezed so hard that the pressure swells	true
One of the most unique features of planet Earth is its large Moon. Unlike the only other natural satellites orbiting an inner planet, those of Mars, the Moon is not a captured asteroid. Understanding the Moons birth and early history reveals a great deal about Earths early days. 	the moon formed at the same time earth formed	false
Lunar rocks reveal an enormous amount about Earths early days. The Genesis Rock, with a date of 4.5 billion years, is only about 100 million years younger than the solar system (see opening image). The rock is a piece of the Moons anorthosite crust, which was the original crust. Why do you think Moon rocks contain information that is not available from Earths own materials? Can you find how all of the evidence presented in the bullet points above is present in the Moons birth story? 	the genesis rock is a piece of the moons original crust	true
Astronomers have carried out computer simulations that are consistent with these facts and have detailed a birth story for the Moon. A little more than 4.5 billion years ago, roughly 70 million years after Earth formed, planetary bodies were being pummeled by asteroids and planetoids of all kinds. Earth was struck by a Mars-sized asteroid (Figure 1.1). An artists depiction of the impact that produced the Moon. The tremendous energy from the impact melted both bodies. The molten material mixed up. The dense metals remained on Earth but some of the molten, rocky material was flung into an orbit around Earth. It eventually accreted into a single body, the Moon. Since both planetary bodies were molten, material could differentiate out of the magma ocean into core, mantle, and crust as they cooled. Earths fast spin is from energy imparted to it by the impact. 	in the early solar system there was a lot of debris  asteroids comets and planetoids  flying around	true
The most widely accepted explanation of how the solar system formed is called the nebular hypothesis. According to this hypothesis, the Sun and the planets of our solar system formed about 4.6 billion years ago from the collapse of a giant cloud of gas and dust, called a nebula. The nebula was drawn together by gravity, which released gravitational potential energy. As small particles of dust and gas smashed together to create larger ones, they released kinetic energy. As the nebula collapsed, the gravity at the center increased and the cloud started to spin because of its angular momentum. As it collapsed further, the spinning got faster, much as an ice skater spins faster when he pulls his arms to his sides during a spin. Much of the clouds mass migrated to its center but the rest of the material flattened out in an enormous disk. The disk contained hydrogen and helium, along with heavier elements and even simple organic molecules. 	the nebular was drawn together by gravity which released kinetic energy	false
As gravity pulled matter into the center of the disk, the density and pressure at the center became intense. When the pressure in the center of the disk was high enough, nuclear fusion began. A star was bornthe Sun. The burning star stopped the disk from collapsing further. Meanwhile, the outer parts of the disk were cooling off. Matter condensed from the cloud and small pieces of dust started clumping together. These clumps collided and combined with other clumps. Larger clumps, called An artists painting of a protoplanetary disk. planetesimals, attracted smaller clumps with their gravity. Gravity at the center of the disk attracted heavier particles, such as rock and metal and lighter particles remained further out in the disk. Eventually, the planetesimals formed protoplanets, which grew to become the planets and moons that we find in our solar system today. Because of the gravitational sorting of material, the inner planets  Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars  formed from dense rock and metal. The outer planets  Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune  condensed farther from the Sun from lighter materials such as hydrogen, helium, water, ammonia, and methane. Out by Jupiter and beyond, where its very cold, these materials form solid particles. The nebular hypothesis was designed to explain some of the basic features of the solar system: The orbits of the planets lie in nearly the same plane with the Sun at the center The planets revolve in the same direction The planets mostly rotate in the same direction The axes of rotation of the planets are mostly nearly perpendicular to the orbital plane The oldest moon rocks are 4.5 billion years Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	materials that on earth are liquids or gases are solids in the outer planets	true
Can you name some fossils? How about dinosaur bones or dinosaur footprints? Animal skeletons, teeth, shells, coprolites (otherwise known as feces), or any other remains or traces from a living creature that becomes rock is a fossil. The same processes that formed these fossils also created some of our most important energy resources, fossil fuels. Coal, oil, and natural gas are fossil fuels. Fossil fuels come from living matter starting about 500 million years ago. Millions of years ago, plants used energy from the Sun to form sugars, carbohydrates, and other energy-rich carbon compounds. As plants and animals died, their remains settled on the ground on land and in swamps, lakes, and seas (Figure 1.1). Over time, layer upon layer of these remains accumulated. Eventually, the layers were buried so deeply that they were crushed by an enormous mass of earth. The weight of this earth pressing down on these plant and animal remains created intense heat and pressure. After millions of years of heat and pressure, the material in these layers turned into chemicals called hydrocarbons (Figure 1.2). Hydrocarbons are made of carbon and hydrogen atoms. This molecule with one carbon and four hydrogen atoms is methane. Hydrocarbons can be solid, liquid, or gaseous. The solid form is what we know as coal. The liquid form is petroleum, or crude oil. Natural gas is the gaseous form. The solar energy stored in fossil fuels is a rich source of energy. Although fossil fuels provide very high quality energy, they are non-renewable. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	fossil fuels are a very poor source of energy	false
Can you name some fossils? How about dinosaur bones or dinosaur footprints? Animal skeletons, teeth, shells, coprolites (otherwise known as feces), or any other remains or traces from a living creature that becomes rock is a fossil. The same processes that formed these fossils also created some of our most important energy resources, fossil fuels. Coal, oil, and natural gas are fossil fuels. Fossil fuels come from living matter starting about 500 million years ago. Millions of years ago, plants used energy from the Sun to form sugars, carbohydrates, and other energy-rich carbon compounds. As plants and animals died, their remains settled on the ground on land and in swamps, lakes, and seas (Figure 1.1). Over time, layer upon layer of these remains accumulated. Eventually, the layers were buried so deeply that they were crushed by an enormous mass of earth. The weight of this earth pressing down on these plant and animal remains created intense heat and pressure. After millions of years of heat and pressure, the material in these layers turned into chemicals called hydrocarbons (Figure 1.2). Hydrocarbons are made of carbon and hydrogen atoms. This molecule with one carbon and four hydrogen atoms is methane. Hydrocarbons can be solid, liquid, or gaseous. The solid form is what we know as coal. The liquid form is petroleum, or crude oil. Natural gas is the gaseous form. The solar energy stored in fossil fuels is a rich source of energy. Although fossil fuels provide very high quality energy, they are non-renewable. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	most of the fossil fuels we use today formed hundreds of millions of years ago	true
Fossil fuels provide about 85% of the worlds energy at this time. Worldwide fossil fuel usage has increased many times over in the past half century (coal - 2.6x, oil - 8x, natural gas - 14x) because of population increases, because of increases in the number of cars, televisions, and other fuel-consuming uses in the developed world, and because of lifestyle improvements in the developing world. The amount of fossil fuels that remain untapped is unknown, but can likely be measured in decades for oil and natural gas and in a few centuries for coal (Figure 1.1). 	being nonrenewable resources fossil fuels will last on the order of decades for coal and centuries for oil and natural gas	false
Fossil fuels provide about 85% of the worlds energy at this time. Worldwide fossil fuel usage has increased many times over in the past half century (coal - 2.6x, oil - 8x, natural gas - 14x) because of population increases, because of increases in the number of cars, televisions, and other fuel-consuming uses in the developed world, and because of lifestyle improvements in the developing world. The amount of fossil fuels that remain untapped is unknown, but can likely be measured in decades for oil and natural gas and in a few centuries for coal (Figure 1.1). 	although petroleum coal and natural gas will eventually run out tar sands and oil shale will be available for centuries at no more cost than traditional sources of fossil fuels	false
Fossil fuels provide about 85% of the worlds energy at this time. Worldwide fossil fuel usage has increased many times over in the past half century (coal - 2.6x, oil - 8x, natural gas - 14x) because of population increases, because of increases in the number of cars, televisions, and other fuel-consuming uses in the developed world, and because of lifestyle improvements in the developing world. The amount of fossil fuels that remain untapped is unknown, but can likely be measured in decades for oil and natural gas and in a few centuries for coal (Figure 1.1). 	if people everyone in the developed world froze their use of oil at its current level the annual amount of oil used would not increase	false
As the easy-to-reach fossil fuel sources are depleted, alternative sources of fossil fuels are increasingly being exploited (Figure 1.2). These include oil shale and tar sands. Oil shale is rock that contains dispersed oil that has not collected in reservoirs. To extract the oil from the shale requires enormous amounts of hot water. Tar sands are rocky materials mixed with very thick oil. The tar is too thick to pump and so tar sands are strip-mined. Hot water and caustic soda are used to separate the oil from the rock. The environmental consequences of mining these fuels, and of fossil fuel use in general, along with the fact that these fuels do not have a limitless supply, are prompting the development of alternative energy sources in some regions. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  A satellite image of an oil-sands mine in Canada. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the keystone xl pipeline is controversial because the oil it carries could cause environmental damage	true
Organisms that live in lakes, ponds, streams, springs or wetlands are part of freshwater ecosystems. These ecosys- tems vary by temperature, pressure (in lakes), the amount of light that penetrates and the type of vegetation that lives there. 	freshwater ecosystems include lakes ponds streams and wetlands	true
As mentioned above, wetlands are home to many different species of organisms. Although they make up only 5% of the area of the United States, wetlands contain more than 30% of the plant types. Many endangered species live in wetlands, so wetlands are protected from human use. Wetlands also play a key biological role by removing pollutants from water. For example, they can trap and use fertilizer that has washed off a farmers field, and therefore they prevent that fertilizer from contaminating another body of water. Since wetlands naturally purify water, preserving wetlands also helps to maintain clean supplies of water. 	wetlands make up more than 30 of the land in the us but have only 5 of the plant types	false
Marshes are shallow wetlands around lakes, streams, or the ocean where grasses and reeds are common, but trees are not (Figure 1.2). Frogs, turtles, muskrats, and many varieties of birds are at home in marshes. A salt marsh on Cape Cod in Mas- sachusetts. 	wetlands never contain more than a few trees	false
Galaxies are the biggest groups of stars and can contain anywhere from a few million stars to many billions of stars. Every star that is visible in the night sky is part of the Milky Way Galaxy. To the naked eye, the closest major galaxy the Andromeda Galaxy, shown in Figure 1.1  looks like only a dim, fuzzy spot. But that fuzzy spot contains one trillion  1,000,000,000,000  stars! Galaxies are divided into three types according to shape: spiral galaxies, elliptical galaxies, and irregular galaxies. 	galaxies can contain billions or trillions of stars	true
Is the galaxy in Figure 1.5 a spiral galaxy or an elliptical galaxy? It is neither one! Galaxies that are not clearly elliptical galaxies or spiral galaxies are irregular galaxies. How might an irregular galaxy form? Most irregular galaxies were once spiral or elliptical galaxies that were then deformed either by gravitational attraction to a larger galaxy or by a collision with another galaxy. This galaxy, called NGC 1427A, has nei- ther a spiral nor an elliptical shape. 	irregular galaxies may be deformed by gravitational attraction to another galaxy	true
To be able to discuss Earth history, scientists needed some way to refer to the time periods in which events happened and organisms lived. With the information they collected from fossil evidence and using Stenos principles, they created a listing of rock layers from oldest to youngest. Then they divided Earths history into blocks of time with each block separated by important events, such as the disappearance of a species of fossil from the rock record. Since many of the scientists who first assigned names to times in Earths history were from Europe, they named the blocks of time from towns or other local places where the rock layers that represented that time were found. From these blocks of time the scientists created the geologic time scale (Figure 1.1). In the geologic time scale the youngest ages are on the top and the oldest on the bottom. Why do you think that the more recent time periods are divided more finely? Do you think the divisions in the scale below are proportional to the amount of time each time period represented in Earth history? In what eon, era, period and epoch do we now live? We live in the Holocene (sometimes called Recent) epoch, Quaternary period, Cenozoic era, and Phanerozoic eon. 	naming time periods makes it easier to talk about them	true
Its always fun to think about geologic time in a framework that we can more readily understand. Here are when some major events in Earth history would have occurred if all of earth history was condensed down to one calendar year. January 1 12 am: Earth forms from the planetary nebula - 4600 million years ago February 25, 12:30 pm: The origin of life; the first cells - 3900 million years ago March 4, 3:39 pm: Oldest dated rocks - 3800 million years ago March 20, 1:33 pm: First stromatolite fossils - 3600 million years ago July 17, 9:54 pm: first fossil evidence of cells with nuclei - 2100 million years ago November 18, 5:11 pm: Cambrian Explosion - 544 million years ago December 1, 8:49 am: first insects - 385 million years ago December 2, 3:54 am: first land animals, amphibians - 375 million years ago December 5, 5:50 pm: first reptiles - 330 million years ago December 12, 12:09 pm: Permo-Triassic Extinction - 245 million years ago December 13, 8:37 pm: first dinosaurs - 228 million years ago December 14, 9:59 am: first mammals  220 million years ago December 22, 8:24 pm: first flowering plants - 115 million years ago December 26, 7:52 pm: Cretaceous-Tertiary Extinction - 66 million years ago December 26, 9:47 pm: first ancestors of dogs - 64 million years ago December 27, 5:25 am: widespread grasses - 60 million years ago December 27, 11:09 am: first ancestors of pigs and deer - 57 million years ago December 28, 9:31 pm: first monkeys - 39 million years ago December 31, 5:18 pm: oldest hominid - 4 million years ago December 31, 11:02 pm: oldest direct human ancestor - 1 million years ago December 31, 11:48 pm: first modern human - 200,000 years ago December 31, 11:59 pm: Revolutionary War - 235 years ago 	about 18 of earth history passed before the explosion of life forms in the cambrian	false
To be able to discuss Earth history, scientists needed some way to refer to the time periods in which events happened and organisms lived. With the information they collected from fossil evidence and using Stenos principles, they created a listing of rock layers from oldest to youngest. Then they divided Earths history into blocks of time with each block separated by important events, such as the disappearance of a species of fossil from the rock record. Since many of the scientists who first assigned names to times in Earths history were from Europe, they named the blocks of time from towns or other local places where the rock layers that represented that time were found. From these blocks of time the scientists created the geologic time scale (Figure 1.1). In the geologic time scale the youngest ages are on the top and the oldest on the bottom. Why do you think that the more recent time periods are divided more finely? Do you think the divisions in the scale below are proportional to the amount of time each time period represented in Earth history? In what eon, era, period and epoch do we now live? We live in the Holocene (sometimes called Recent) epoch, Quaternary period, Cenozoic era, and Phanerozoic eon. 	eon era period epoch is the order from the largest amount of time to the smallest amount of time	true
Rocks have three possible responses to increasing stress (illustrated in Figure 1.3): elastic deformation: the rock returns to its original shape when the stress is removed. plastic deformation: the rock does not return to its original shape when the stress is removed. fracture: the rock breaks. Under what conditions do you think a rock is more likely to fracture? Is it more likely to break deep within Earths crust or at the surface? What if the stress applied is sharp rather than gradual? At the Earths surface, rocks usually break quite quickly, but deeper in the crust, where temperatures and pressures are higher, rocks are more likely to deform plastically. Sudden stress, such as a hit with a hammer, is more likely to make a rock break. Stress applied over time often leads to plastic deformation. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	a sudden stress is more likely to make a rock fracture than a show increasing stress	true
Stress is the force applied to an object. In geology, stress is the force per unit area that is placed on a rock. Four types of stresses act on materials. A deeply buried rock is pushed down by the weight of all the material above it. Since the rock cannot move, it cannot deform. This is called confining stress. Compression squeezes rocks together, causing rocks to fold or fracture (break) (Figure 1.1). Compression is the most common stress at convergent plate boundaries. Stress caused these rocks to fracture. Rocks that are pulled apart are under tension. Rocks under tension lengthen or break apart. Tension is the major type of stress at divergent plate boundaries. When forces are parallel but moving in opposite directions, the stress is called shear (Figure 1.2). Shear stress is the most common stress at transform plate boundaries. Shearing in rocks. The white quartz vein has been elongated by shear. When stress causes a material to change shape, it has undergone strain or deformation. Deformed rocks are common in geologically active areas. A rocks response to stress depends on the rock type, the surrounding temperature, the pressure conditions the rock is under, the length of time the rock is under stress, and the type of stress. 	tension occurs at divergent boundaries	true
The heat that is used for geothermal power may come to the surface naturally as hot springs or geysers, like The Geysers in northern California. Where water does not naturally come to the surface, engineers may pump cool water into the ground. The water is heated by the hot rock and then pumped back to the surface for use. The hot water or steam from a geothermal well spins a turbine to make electricity. Geothermal energy is clean and safe. The energy source is renewable since hot rock is found everywhere in the Earth, although in many parts of the world the hot rock is not close enough to the surface for building geothermal power plants. In some areas, geothermal power is common (Figure 1.1). In the United States, California is a leader in producing geothermal energy. The largest geothermal power plant in the state is in the Geysers Geothermal Resource Area in Napa and Sonoma Counties. The source of heat is thought to be a large magma chamber lying beneath the area. Where Earths internal heat gets close to the surface, geothermal power is a clean source of energy. In California, The Geysers supplies energy for many nearby homes and businesses. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	geothermal energy creates greenhouse gases and other pollutants	false
The heat that is used for geothermal power may come to the surface naturally as hot springs or geysers, like The Geysers in northern California. Where water does not naturally come to the surface, engineers may pump cool water into the ground. The water is heated by the hot rock and then pumped back to the surface for use. The hot water or steam from a geothermal well spins a turbine to make electricity. Geothermal energy is clean and safe. The energy source is renewable since hot rock is found everywhere in the Earth, although in many parts of the world the hot rock is not close enough to the surface for building geothermal power plants. In some areas, geothermal power is common (Figure 1.1). In the United States, California is a leader in producing geothermal energy. The largest geothermal power plant in the state is in the Geysers Geothermal Resource Area in Napa and Sonoma Counties. The source of heat is thought to be a large magma chamber lying beneath the area. Where Earths internal heat gets close to the surface, geothermal power is a clean source of energy. In California, The Geysers supplies energy for many nearby homes and businesses. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	at any geothermal plant the energy will run out as cold water cools the hot rock	false
The heat that is used for geothermal power may come to the surface naturally as hot springs or geysers, like The Geysers in northern California. Where water does not naturally come to the surface, engineers may pump cool water into the ground. The water is heated by the hot rock and then pumped back to the surface for use. The hot water or steam from a geothermal well spins a turbine to make electricity. Geothermal energy is clean and safe. The energy source is renewable since hot rock is found everywhere in the Earth, although in many parts of the world the hot rock is not close enough to the surface for building geothermal power plants. In some areas, geothermal power is common (Figure 1.1). In the United States, California is a leader in producing geothermal energy. The largest geothermal power plant in the state is in the Geysers Geothermal Resource Area in Napa and Sonoma Counties. The source of heat is thought to be a large magma chamber lying beneath the area. Where Earths internal heat gets close to the surface, geothermal power is a clean source of energy. In California, The Geysers supplies energy for many nearby homes and businesses. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the likely source of heat for the largest geothermal plant in california is a large magma chamber	true
The heat that is used for geothermal power may come to the surface naturally as hot springs or geysers, like The Geysers in northern California. Where water does not naturally come to the surface, engineers may pump cool water into the ground. The water is heated by the hot rock and then pumped back to the surface for use. The hot water or steam from a geothermal well spins a turbine to make electricity. Geothermal energy is clean and safe. The energy source is renewable since hot rock is found everywhere in the Earth, although in many parts of the world the hot rock is not close enough to the surface for building geothermal power plants. In some areas, geothermal power is common (Figure 1.1). In the United States, California is a leader in producing geothermal energy. The largest geothermal power plant in the state is in the Geysers Geothermal Resource Area in Napa and Sonoma Counties. The source of heat is thought to be a large magma chamber lying beneath the area. Where Earths internal heat gets close to the surface, geothermal power is a clean source of energy. In California, The Geysers supplies energy for many nearby homes and businesses. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	in some locations hot rocks are too deep to be used for geothermal energy	true
Glaciers are melting back in many locations around the world. When a glacier no longer moves, it is called an ice sheet. This usually happens when it is less than 0.1 km2 in area and 50 m thick. 	when a glacier no longer moves it is called an ice sheet	true
Glaciers are melting back in many locations around the world. When a glacier no longer moves, it is called an ice sheet. This usually happens when it is less than 0.1 km2 in area and 50 m thick. 	gem glacier in glacier national park is no longer moving but it is still a glacier	false
With more greenhouse gases trapping heat, average annual global temperatures are rising. This is known as global warming. 	global average temperatures are increasing and we are already seeing the effects of this	true
The following images show changes in the Earth and organisms as a result of global warming: Figure 1.2, Figure (a) Breakup of the Larsen Ice Shelf in Antarctica in 2002 was related to climate warming in the region. (b) The Boulder Glacier has melted back tremendously since 1985. Other mountain glaciers around the world are also melting. The timing of events for species is changing. Mating and migrations take place earlier in the spring months. Species that can are moving their ranges uphill. Some regions that were already marginal for agriculture are no longer arable because they have become too warm or dry. What are the two major effects being seen in this animation? Glaciers are melting and vegetation zones are moving uphill. If fossil fuel use exploded in the 1950s, why do these changes begin early in the animation? Does this mean that the climate change we are seeing is caused by natural processes and not by fossil fuel use? Permafrost is melting and its extent de- creasing. There are now fewer summer lakes in Siberia. (a) Melting ice caps add water to the oceans, so sea level is rising. Remember that water slightly expands as it warms this expansion is also causing sea level to rise. (b) Weather is becoming more variable with more severe storms and droughts. Snow blanketed the west- ern United States in December 2009. (c) As surface seas warm, phytoplankton productivity has decreased. (d) Coral reefs are dying worldwide; corals that are stressed by high temperatures turn white. (e) Pine beetle infestations have killed trees in western North America The insects have expanded their ranges into areas that were once too cold. Warming temperatures are bringing changes to much of the planet, including California. Sea level is rising, snow pack is changing, and the ecology of the state is responding to these changes. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	when ice caps melt the sea level decreases	false
With more greenhouse gases trapping heat, average annual global temperatures are rising. This is known as global warming. 	burning fossil fuels adds greenhouse gases to the air	true
The following images show changes in the Earth and organisms as a result of global warming: Figure 1.2, Figure (a) Breakup of the Larsen Ice Shelf in Antarctica in 2002 was related to climate warming in the region. (b) The Boulder Glacier has melted back tremendously since 1985. Other mountain glaciers around the world are also melting. The timing of events for species is changing. Mating and migrations take place earlier in the spring months. Species that can are moving their ranges uphill. Some regions that were already marginal for agriculture are no longer arable because they have become too warm or dry. What are the two major effects being seen in this animation? Glaciers are melting and vegetation zones are moving uphill. If fossil fuel use exploded in the 1950s, why do these changes begin early in the animation? Does this mean that the climate change we are seeing is caused by natural processes and not by fossil fuel use? Permafrost is melting and its extent de- creasing. There are now fewer summer lakes in Siberia. (a) Melting ice caps add water to the oceans, so sea level is rising. Remember that water slightly expands as it warms this expansion is also causing sea level to rise. (b) Weather is becoming more variable with more severe storms and droughts. Snow blanketed the west- ern United States in December 2009. (c) As surface seas warm, phytoplankton productivity has decreased. (d) Coral reefs are dying worldwide; corals that are stressed by high temperatures turn white. (e) Pine beetle infestations have killed trees in western North America The insects have expanded their ranges into areas that were once too cold. Warming temperatures are bringing changes to much of the planet, including California. Sea level is rising, snow pack is changing, and the ecology of the state is responding to these changes. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	permafrost is melting but its extent is increasing	false
Isaac Newton first described gravity as the force that causes objects to fall to the ground and also the force that keeps the Moon circling Earth instead of flying off into space in a straight line. Newton defined the Universal Law of Gravitation, which states that a force of attraction, called gravity, exists between all objects in the universe (Figure from each other. The greater the objects mass, the greater the force of attraction; in addition, the greater the distance between objects, the smaller the force of attraction. The distance between the Sun and each of its planets is very large, but the Sun and each of the planets are also very large. Gravity keeps each planet orbiting the Sun because the star and its planets are very large objects. The force of gravity also holds moons in orbit around planets. The force of gravity exists between all objects in the universe; the strength of the force depends on the mass of the objects and the distance between them. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the greater an objects mass the greater the force of attraction	true
Isaac Newton first described gravity as the force that causes objects to fall to the ground and also the force that keeps the Moon circling Earth instead of flying off into space in a straight line. Newton defined the Universal Law of Gravitation, which states that a force of attraction, called gravity, exists between all objects in the universe (Figure from each other. The greater the objects mass, the greater the force of attraction; in addition, the greater the distance between objects, the smaller the force of attraction. The distance between the Sun and each of its planets is very large, but the Sun and each of the planets are also very large. Gravity keeps each planet orbiting the Sun because the star and its planets are very large objects. The force of gravity also holds moons in orbit around planets. The force of gravity exists between all objects in the universe; the strength of the force depends on the mass of the objects and the distance between them. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the farther the distance between two objects the greater the attraction	false
The exception to Earths temperature being in balance is caused by greenhouse gases. But first the role of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere must be explained. Greenhouse gases warm the atmosphere by trapping heat. Some of the heat that radiates out from the ground is trapped by greenhouse gases in the troposphere. Like a blanket on a sleeping person, greenhouse gases act as insulation for the planet. The warming of the atmosphere because of insulation by greenhouse gases is called the greenhouse effect (Figure 1.1). Greenhouse gases are the component of the atmosphere that moderate Earths temperatures. 	all greenhouse gases are emitted by natural processes	false
Greenhouse gases include CO2 , H2 O, methane, O3 , nitrous oxides (NO and NO2 ), and chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). All are a normal part of the atmosphere except CFCs. Table 1.1 shows how each greenhouse gas naturally enters the atmosphere. Greenhouse Gas Carbon dioxide Methane Nitrous oxide Ozone Chlorofluorocarbons Where It Comes From Respiration, volcanic eruptions, decomposition of plant material; burning of fossil fuels Decomposition of plant material under some condi- tions, biochemical reactions in stomachs Produced by bacteria Atmospheric processes Not naturally occurring; made by humans Different greenhouse gases have different abilities to trap heat. For example, one methane molecule traps 23 times as much heat as one CO2 molecule. One CFC-12 molecule (a type of CFC) traps 10,600 times as much heat as one CO2 . Still, CO2 is a very important greenhouse gas because it is much more abundant in the atmosphere. 	one cfc12 molecule traps 10600 times as much heat as one co2 molecule	true
Human activity has significantly raised the levels of many of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Methane levels are about 2 1/2 times higher as a result of human activity. Carbon dioxide has increased more than 35%. CFCs have only recently existed. What do you think happens as atmospheric greenhouse gas levels increase? More greenhouse gases trap more heat and warm the atmosphere. The increase or decrease of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere affect climate and weather the world over. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	atmospheric greenhouse gas levels are increasing due to human activities	true
For a groundwater aquifer to contain the same amount of water, the amount of recharge must equal the amount of discharge. What are the likely sources of recharge? What are the likely sources of discharge? What happens to the water table when there is a lot of rainfall? What happens when there is a drought? Although groundwater levels do not rise and fall as rapidly as at the surface, over time the water table will rise during wet periods and fall during droughts. In wet regions, streams are fed by groundwater; the surface of the stream is the top of the water table (Figure 1.2). In dry regions, water seeps down from the stream into the aquifer. These streams are often dry much of the year. Water leaves a groundwater reservoir in streams or springs. People take water from aquifers, too. 	if you were going to drill a well into an aquifer it would be a shorter distance to drill down into a valley than down into a hill	true
Groundwater meets the surface in a stream (Figure 1.2) or a spring (Figure 1.3). A spring may be constant, or may only flow at certain times of year. Towns in many locations depend on water from springs. Springs can be an extremely important source of water in locations where surface water is scarce. 	all springs flow all year round	false
To be a good aquifer, the rock in the aquifer must have good: porosity: small spaces between grains permeability: connections between pores To reach an aquifer, surface water infiltrates downward into the ground through tiny spaces or pores in the rock. The water travels down through the permeable rock until it reaches a layer that does not have pores; this rock is impermeable (Figure 1.1). This impermeable rock layer forms the base of the aquifer. The upper surface where the groundwater reaches is the water table. Groundwater is found beneath the solid surface. Notice that the water table roughly mirrors the slope of the lands surface. A well penetrates the water table. 	to be a good aquifer the only important quality for a rock to have is high porosity	false
Some aquifers are overused; people pump out more water than is replaced. As the water is pumped out, the water table slowly falls, requiring wells to be dug deeper, which takes more money and energy. Wells may go completely dry if they are not deep enough to reach into the lowered water table. Other problems may stem from groundwater overuse. Subsidence and saltwater intrusion are two of them. 	wells may go completely dry if they are not deep enough to reach in a lowered water table	true
Some aquifers are overused; people pump out more water than is replaced. As the water is pumped out, the water table slowly falls, requiring wells to be dug deeper, which takes more money and energy. Wells may go completely dry if they are not deep enough to reach into the lowered water table. Other problems may stem from groundwater overuse. Subsidence and saltwater intrusion are two of them. 	when a water table decline wells must be drilled deeper	true
Some aquifers are overused; people pump out more water than is replaced. As the water is pumped out, the water table slowly falls, requiring wells to be dug deeper, which takes more money and energy. Wells may go completely dry if they are not deep enough to reach into the lowered water table. Other problems may stem from groundwater overuse. Subsidence and saltwater intrusion are two of them. 	groundwater is a stable supply of water and can never be depleted	false
The Ogallala Aquifer supplies about one-third of the irrigation water in the United States. The Ogallala Aquifer is widely used by people for municipal and agricultural needs. (Figure 1.2). The aquifer is found from 30 to 100 meters deep over an area of about 440,000 square kilometers! The water in the aquifer is mostly from the last ice age. About eight times more water is taken from the Ogallala Aquifer each year than is replenished. Much of the water is used for irrigation (Figure 1.3). Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Intense drought has reduced groundwater levels in the southern U.S., particularly in Texas and New Mexico. 	the water in the ogallala aquifer is mostly from the last ice age	true
Groundwater pollutants are the same as surface water pollutants: municipal, agricultural, and industrial. Ground- water is more susceptible to some sources of pollution. For example, irrigation water infiltrates into the ground, bringing with it the pesticides, fertilizers, and herbicides that were sprayed on the fields. Water that seeps through landfills also carries toxins into the ground. Toxic substances and things like gasoline are kept in underground storage tanks; more than 100,000 of the tanks are currently leaking and many more may develop leaks. 	more than 100000 tanks of toxic substances are currently leaking underground	true
Groundwater is a bit safer from pollution than surface water from some types of pollution because some pollutants are filtered out by the rock and soil that water travels through as it travels through the ground or once it is in the aquifer. But rock and soil cant get out everything, depending on the type of rock and soil and on the types of pollutants. As it is, about 25% of the usable groundwater and 45% of the municipal groundwater supplies in the United States are polluted. 	about 25 of groundwater in the united states is polluted	true
Groundwater is a bit safer from pollution than surface water from some types of pollution because some pollutants are filtered out by the rock and soil that water travels through as it travels through the ground or once it is in the aquifer. But rock and soil cant get out everything, depending on the type of rock and soil and on the types of pollutants. As it is, about 25% of the usable groundwater and 45% of the municipal groundwater supplies in the United States are polluted. 	groundwater that moves through the rock aquifer for years is decontaminated and drinkable	false
Groundwater is a bit safer from pollution than surface water from some types of pollution because some pollutants are filtered out by the rock and soil that water travels through as it travels through the ground or once it is in the aquifer. But rock and soil cant get out everything, depending on the type of rock and soil and on the types of pollutants. As it is, about 25% of the usable groundwater and 45% of the municipal groundwater supplies in the United States are polluted. 	fortunately toxic chemicals that leak onto the ground remain on the ground and do not get into the groundwater supply	false
Not only has the population increased, but the rate of population growth has increased (Figure 1.2). The population was estimated to reach 7 billion in 2012, but it did so in 2011, just 12 years after reaching 6 billion. Human population from 10,000 BC through 2000 AD, showing the exponential increase in human population that has occurred in the last few centuries. The amount of time between the addition of each one billion people to the planets population, including speculation about the future. Although population continues to grow rapidly, the rate that the growth rate is increasing has declined. Still, a recent estimate by the United Nations estimates that 10.1 billion people will be sharing this planet by the end of the century. The total added will be about 3 billion people, which is more than were even in existence as recently as 1960. 	the rate at which the human population is growing is decreasing	false
Hazardous waste is any waste material that is dangerous to human health or that degrades the environment. Haz- ardous waste includes substances that are: 1. 2. 3. 4. Toxic: causes serious harm or death, or is poisonous. Chemically active: causes dangerous or unwanted chemical reactions, such as explosions. Corrosive: destroys other things by chemical reactions. Flammable: easily catches fire and may send dangerous smoke into the air. All sorts of materials are hazardous wastes and there are many sources. Many people have substances that could become hazardous wastes in their homes. Several cleaning and gardening chemicals are hazardous if not used properly. These include chemicals like drain cleaners and pesticides that are toxic to humans and many other creatures. While these chemicals are fine if they are stored and used properly, if they are used or disposed of improperly, they may become hazardous wastes. Others sources of hazardous waste are shown in Table 1.1. Type of Hazardous Waste Chemicals from the automobile in- dustry Example Gasoline, used motor oil, battery acid, brake fluid Batteries Car batteries, household batteries Medical wastes Dry cleaning chemicals Surgical gloves, wastes contami- nated with body fluids such as blood, x-ray equipment Paints, paint thinners, paint strip- pers, wood stains Many various chemicals Agricultural chemicals Pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers Paints Why it is Hazardous Toxic to humans and other organ- isms; often chemically active; often flammable. Contain toxic chemicals; are often corrosive. Toxic to humans and other organ- isms; may be chemically active. Toxic; flammable. Toxic; many cause cancer in hu- mans. Toxic to humans; can harm other organism; pollute soils and water. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	toxic chemicals are all right if they are stored and used properly	true
Hazardous waste is any waste material that is dangerous to human health or that degrades the environment. Haz- ardous waste includes substances that are: 1. 2. 3. 4. Toxic: causes serious harm or death, or is poisonous. Chemically active: causes dangerous or unwanted chemical reactions, such as explosions. Corrosive: destroys other things by chemical reactions. Flammable: easily catches fire and may send dangerous smoke into the air. All sorts of materials are hazardous wastes and there are many sources. Many people have substances that could become hazardous wastes in their homes. Several cleaning and gardening chemicals are hazardous if not used properly. These include chemicals like drain cleaners and pesticides that are toxic to humans and many other creatures. While these chemicals are fine if they are stored and used properly, if they are used or disposed of improperly, they may become hazardous wastes. Others sources of hazardous waste are shown in Table 1.1. Type of Hazardous Waste Chemicals from the automobile in- dustry Example Gasoline, used motor oil, battery acid, brake fluid Batteries Car batteries, household batteries Medical wastes Dry cleaning chemicals Surgical gloves, wastes contami- nated with body fluids such as blood, x-ray equipment Paints, paint thinners, paint strip- pers, wood stains Many various chemicals Agricultural chemicals Pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers Paints Why it is Hazardous Toxic to humans and other organ- isms; often chemically active; often flammable. Contain toxic chemicals; are often corrosive. Toxic to humans and other organ- isms; may be chemically active. Toxic; flammable. Toxic; many cause cancer in hu- mans. Toxic to humans; can harm other organism; pollute soils and water. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	if you are going to use pesticides or herbicides the more you use the more pests you kill and the better it is	false
Because solar energy continually enters Earths atmosphere and ground surface, is the planet getting hotter? The answer is no (although the next section contains an exception), because energy from Earth escapes into space through the top of the atmosphere. If the amount that exits is equal to the amount that comes in, then average global temperature stays the same. This means that the planets heat budget is in balance. What happens if more energy comes in than goes out? If more energy goes out than comes in? To say that the Earths heat budget is balanced ignores an important point. The amount of incoming solar energy is different at different latitudes. Where do you think the most solar energy ends up and why? Where does the least solar energy end up and why? See the Table 1.1. Equatorial Region Polar Regions Day Length Nearly the same all year Night 6 months Sun Angle High Solar Radiation High Albedo Low Low Low High Note: Colder temperatures mean more ice and snow cover the ground, making albedo relatively high. The difference in solar energy received at different latitudes drives atmospheric circulation. 	the equatorial regions albedo is low because the region is heavily forested	true
Because solar energy continually enters Earths atmosphere and ground surface, is the planet getting hotter? The answer is no (although the next section contains an exception), because energy from Earth escapes into space through the top of the atmosphere. If the amount that exits is equal to the amount that comes in, then average global temperature stays the same. This means that the planets heat budget is in balance. What happens if more energy comes in than goes out? If more energy goes out than comes in? To say that the Earths heat budget is balanced ignores an important point. The amount of incoming solar energy is different at different latitudes. Where do you think the most solar energy ends up and why? Where does the least solar energy end up and why? See the Table 1.1. Equatorial Region Polar Regions Day Length Nearly the same all year Night 6 months Sun Angle High Solar Radiation High Albedo Low Low Low High Note: Colder temperatures mean more ice and snow cover the ground, making albedo relatively high. The difference in solar energy received at different latitudes drives atmospheric circulation. 	the amount of incoming solar radiation is the same at all latitudes	false
Because solar energy continually enters Earths atmosphere and ground surface, is the planet getting hotter? The answer is no (although the next section contains an exception), because energy from Earth escapes into space through the top of the atmosphere. If the amount that exits is equal to the amount that comes in, then average global temperature stays the same. This means that the planets heat budget is in balance. What happens if more energy comes in than goes out? If more energy goes out than comes in? To say that the Earths heat budget is balanced ignores an important point. The amount of incoming solar energy is different at different latitudes. Where do you think the most solar energy ends up and why? Where does the least solar energy end up and why? See the Table 1.1. Equatorial Region Polar Regions Day Length Nearly the same all year Night 6 months Sun Angle High Solar Radiation High Albedo Low Low Low High Note: Colder temperatures mean more ice and snow cover the ground, making albedo relatively high. The difference in solar energy received at different latitudes drives atmospheric circulation. 	night and day each last 6 months in the polar regions	true
About half of the solar radiation that strikes the top of the atmosphere is filtered out before it reaches the ground. This energy can be absorbed by atmospheric gases, reflected by clouds, or scattered. Scattering occurs when a light wave strikes a particle and bounces off in some other direction. About 3% of the energy that strikes the ground is reflected back into the atmosphere. The rest is absorbed by rocks, soil, and water and then radiated back into the air as heat. These infrared wavelengths can only be seen by infrared sensors. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	about 90 of the solar radiation that strikes the top of the atmosphere is filtered out before it reaches the ground	false
Heat moves in the atmosphere the same way it moves through the solid Earth or another medium. What follows is a review of the way heat flows, but applied to the atmosphere. Radiation is the transfer of energy between two objects by electromagnetic waves. Heat radiates from the ground into the lower atmosphere. In conduction, heat moves from areas of more heat to areas of less heat by direct contact. Warmer molecules vibrate rapidly and collide with other nearby molecules, transferring their energy. In the atmosphere, conduction is more effective at lower altitudes, where air density is higher. This transfers heat upward to where the molecules are spread further apart or transfers heat laterally from a warmer to a cooler spot, where the molecules are moving less vigorously. Heat transfer by movement of heated materials is called convection. Heat that radiates from the ground initiates convection cells in the atmosphere (Figure 1.1). Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	conduction is more effective at higher altitudes where air density is lower	false
Different parts of the Earth receive different amounts of solar radiation. Which part of the planet receives the most solar radiation? The Suns rays strike the surface most directly at the Equator. The difference in solar energy received at different latitudes drives atmospheric circulation. 	the suns rays strike the surface most directly at the equator	true
A heat wave is different depending on its location. According to the World Meteorological Organization, a region is in a heat wave if it has more than five consecutive days of temperatures that are more than 9 F (5 C) above average. Heat waves have increased in frequency and duration in recent years. The summer 2011 North American heat wave brought record temperatures across the Midwestern and Eastern United States. Many states and localities broke records for temperatures and for most days above 100 F. 	heat waves have increased in frequency and duration in recent years	true
A heat wave is different depending on its location. According to the World Meteorological Organization, a region is in a heat wave if it has more than five consecutive days of temperatures that are more than 9 F (5 C) above average. Heat waves have increased in frequency and duration in recent years. The summer 2011 North American heat wave brought record temperatures across the Midwestern and Eastern United States. Many states and localities broke records for temperatures and for most days above 100 F. 	three months with average daily high temperatures above 100of is normal for phoenix arizona but six days of 100of temperatures in portland oregon is a heat wave	true
A heat wave is different depending on its location. According to the World Meteorological Organization, a region is in a heat wave if it has more than five consecutive days of temperatures that are more than 9 F (5 C) above average. Heat waves have increased in frequency and duration in recent years. The summer 2011 North American heat wave brought record temperatures across the Midwestern and Eastern United States. Many states and localities broke records for temperatures and for most days above 100 F. 	people survive in phoenix arizona in intense heat because they are hardier than people in other locations	false
A heat wave is different depending on its location. According to the World Meteorological Organization, a region is in a heat wave if it has more than five consecutive days of temperatures that are more than 9 F (5 C) above average. Heat waves have increased in frequency and duration in recent years. The summer 2011 North American heat wave brought record temperatures across the Midwestern and Eastern United States. Many states and localities broke records for temperatures and for most days above 100 F. 	more people die in heat waves than in blizzards tornadoes or hurricanes	true
Water heated below ground that rises through a crack to the surface creates a hot spring. The water in hot springs may reach temperatures in the hundreds of degrees Celsius beneath the surface, although most hot springs are much cooler. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	hot springs are cooler than geysers	false
Water sometimes comes into contact with hot rock. The water may emerge at the surface as either a hot spring or a geyser. 	bison use the hot springs in yellowstone to stay warm in the winter because the hot springs do not freeze	true
Water sometimes comes into contact with hot rock. The water may emerge at the surface as either a hot spring or a geyser. 	old faithful geyser is noteworthy for the frequency and predictability of its eruptions	true
Water sometimes comes into contact with hot rock. The water may emerge at the surface as either a hot spring or a geyser. 	hot springs are only found in the tectonically active western united states	true
It wasnt always known that fossils were parts of living organisms. In 1666, a young doctor named Nicholas Steno dissected the head of an enormous great white shark that had been caught by fisherman near Florence, Italy. Steno was struck by the resemblance of the sharks teeth to fossils found in inland mountains and hills (Figure 1.1). Most people at the time did not believe that fossils were once part of living creatures. Authors in that day thought that the fossils of marine animals found in tall mountains, miles from any ocean could be explained in one of two ways: The shells were washed up during the Biblical flood. (This explanation could not account for the fact that fossils were not only found on mountains, but also within mountains, in rocks that had been quarried from deep below Earths surface.) The fossils formed within the rocks as a result of mysterious forces. But for Steno, the close resemblance between fossils and modern organisms was impossible to ignore. Instead of invoking supernatural forces, Steno concluded that fossils were once parts of living creatures. Fossil Shark Tooth (left) and Modern Shark Tooth (right). 	nicholas steno in 1666 said that fossils were once part of living creatures because fossils from far inland looked like the teeth of a freshly caught great white shark	true
Despite these problems, there is a rich fossil record. How does an organism become fossilized? A rare insect fossil. 	almost every single organism that has ever lived became a fossil	false
Unusual circumstances may lead to the preservation of a variety of fossils, as at the La Brea Tar Pits in Los Angeles, California. Although the animals trapped in the La Brea Tar Pits probably suffered a slow, miserable death, their bones were preserved perfectly by the sticky tar. (Figure 1.7). Artists concept of animals surrounding the La Brea Tar Pits. In spite of the difficulties of preservation, billions of fossils have been discovered, examined, and identified by thousands of scientists. The fossil record is our best clue to the history of life on Earth, and an important indicator 	the la brea tar pits in los angeles is an example of an unusual circumstance in which a variety of fossils are preserved	true
A fossil is any remains or traces of an ancient organism. Fossils include body fossils, left behind when the soft parts have decayed away, and trace fossils, such as burrows, tracks, or fossilized coprolites (feces). Collections of fossils are known as fossil assemblages. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	soft parts of an organism are never preserved so life before the evolution of hard parts is a complete mystery	false
Surface currents play an enormous role in Earths climate. Even though the Equator and poles have very different climates, these regions would have more extremely different climates if ocean currents did not transfer heat from the equatorial regions to the higher latitudes. The Gulf Stream is a river of warm water in the Atlantic Ocean, about 160 kilometers wide and about a kilometer deep. Water that enters the Gulf Stream is heated as it travels along the Equator. The warm water then flows up the east coast of North America and across the Atlantic Ocean to Europe (see opening image). The energy the Gulf Stream transfers is enormous: more than 100 times the worlds energy demand. The Gulf Streams warm waters raise temperatures in the North Sea, which raises the air temperatures over land between 3 to 6 C (5 to 11 F). London, U.K., for example, is at about six degrees further south than Quebec, Canada. However, Londons average January temperature is 3.8 C (38 F), while Quebecs is only -12 C (10 F). Because air traveling over the warm water in the Gulf Stream picks up a lot of water, London gets a lot of rain. In contrast, Quebec is much drier and receives its precipitation as snow. Quebec City, Quebec in winter. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	water in the gulf stream travels along the equator and is cooled as it goes	false
Surface currents play an enormous role in Earths climate. Even though the Equator and poles have very different climates, these regions would have more extremely different climates if ocean currents did not transfer heat from the equatorial regions to the higher latitudes. The Gulf Stream is a river of warm water in the Atlantic Ocean, about 160 kilometers wide and about a kilometer deep. Water that enters the Gulf Stream is heated as it travels along the Equator. The warm water then flows up the east coast of North America and across the Atlantic Ocean to Europe (see opening image). The energy the Gulf Stream transfers is enormous: more than 100 times the worlds energy demand. The Gulf Streams warm waters raise temperatures in the North Sea, which raises the air temperatures over land between 3 to 6 C (5 to 11 F). London, U.K., for example, is at about six degrees further south than Quebec, Canada. However, Londons average January temperature is 3.8 C (38 F), while Quebecs is only -12 C (10 F). Because air traveling over the warm water in the Gulf Stream picks up a lot of water, London gets a lot of rain. In contrast, Quebec is much drier and receives its precipitation as snow. Quebec City, Quebec in winter. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the equator and poles would have even more different climates if it werent for surface ocean currents	true
Surface currents play an enormous role in Earths climate. Even though the Equator and poles have very different climates, these regions would have more extremely different climates if ocean currents did not transfer heat from the equatorial regions to the higher latitudes. The Gulf Stream is a river of warm water in the Atlantic Ocean, about 160 kilometers wide and about a kilometer deep. Water that enters the Gulf Stream is heated as it travels along the Equator. The warm water then flows up the east coast of North America and across the Atlantic Ocean to Europe (see opening image). The energy the Gulf Stream transfers is enormous: more than 100 times the worlds energy demand. The Gulf Streams warm waters raise temperatures in the North Sea, which raises the air temperatures over land between 3 to 6 C (5 to 11 F). London, U.K., for example, is at about six degrees further south than Quebec, Canada. However, Londons average January temperature is 3.8 C (38 F), while Quebecs is only -12 C (10 F). Because air traveling over the warm water in the Gulf Stream picks up a lot of water, London gets a lot of rain. In contrast, Quebec is much drier and receives its precipitation as snow. Quebec City, Quebec in winter. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	quebec canada and london england have different climates because they are at different latitudes	false
Surface currents play an enormous role in Earths climate. Even though the Equator and poles have very different climates, these regions would have more extremely different climates if ocean currents did not transfer heat from the equatorial regions to the higher latitudes. The Gulf Stream is a river of warm water in the Atlantic Ocean, about 160 kilometers wide and about a kilometer deep. Water that enters the Gulf Stream is heated as it travels along the Equator. The warm water then flows up the east coast of North America and across the Atlantic Ocean to Europe (see opening image). The energy the Gulf Stream transfers is enormous: more than 100 times the worlds energy demand. The Gulf Streams warm waters raise temperatures in the North Sea, which raises the air temperatures over land between 3 to 6 C (5 to 11 F). London, U.K., for example, is at about six degrees further south than Quebec, Canada. However, Londons average January temperature is 3.8 C (38 F), while Quebecs is only -12 C (10 F). Because air traveling over the warm water in the Gulf Stream picks up a lot of water, London gets a lot of rain. In contrast, Quebec is much drier and receives its precipitation as snow. Quebec City, Quebec in winter. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the energy in the gulf stream could supply the world with energy 100times over	true
Humans evolved from primates, and apes and humans have a primate common ancestor. About 7 million years ago, chimpanzees (our closest living relatives) and humans shared their last common ancestor. 	humans evolved directly from chimpanzees	false
Humans evolved from primates, and apes and humans have a primate common ancestor. About 7 million years ago, chimpanzees (our closest living relatives) and humans shared their last common ancestor. 	homo sapiens evolved about 200000 years ago	true
Animals of the genus Ardipithecus, living roughly 4 to 6 million years ago, had brains roughly the size of a female chimp. Although they lived in trees, they were bipedal. Standing on two feet allows an organism to see and also to use its hands and arms for hunting. By the time of Australopithecus afarensis, between 3.9 and 2.9 million years ago, these human ancestors were completely bipedal and their brains were growing rapidly (Figure 1.1). Australopithecus afarensis is a human ancestor that lived about 3 million years ago. The genus Homo appeared about 2.5 million years ago. Humans developed the first stone tools. Homo erectus evolved in Africa about 1.8 million years ago. Fossils of these animals show a much more human-like body structure, which allowed them to travel long distances to hunt. Cultures begin and evolve. Homo sapiens, our species, originated about 200,000 years ago in Africa. Evidence of a spiritual life appears about 32,000 years ago with stone figurines that probably have religious significance (Figure 1.2). The ice ages allowed humans to migrate. During the ice ages, water was frozen in glaciers and so land bridges such as the Bering Strait allowed humans to walk from the old world to the new world. DNA evidence suggests that the humans who migrated out of Africa interbred with Neanderthal since these people contain some Neanderthal DNA. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Stone figurines likely indicate a spiritual life. 	scientists are certain that our ancestors had a spiritual life at around 32000 years ago as evidenced by their carved stone figurines	false
As a rock heats up, the minerals that melt at the lowest temperatures melt first. Partial melting occurs when the temperature on a rock is high enough to melt only some of the minerals in the rock. The minerals that will melt will be those that melt at lower temperatures. Fractional crystallization is the opposite of partial melting. This process describes the crystallization of different minerals as magma cools. Bowens Reaction Series indicates the temperatures at which minerals melt or crystallize (Figure 1.1). An under- standing of the way atoms join together to form minerals leads to an understanding of how different igneous rocks form. Bowens Reaction Series also explains why some minerals are always found together and some are never found together. If the liquid separates from the solids at any time in partial melting or fractional crystallization, the chemical composition of the liquid and solid will be different. When that liquid crystallizes, the resulting igneous rock will have a different composition from the parent rock. Bowens Reaction Series. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	ultramafic igneous rocks have the lowest amount of silica of any igneous rocks	true
Different factors play into the composition of a magma and the rock it produces. 	granite is a type of felsic rock	true
Different factors play into the composition of a magma and the rock it produces. 	granite and andesite have the same composition but different texture	false
Different factors play into the composition of a magma and the rock it produces. 	gabbro and basalt have the same composition but different texture	true
Computer models are used to predict the effects of greenhouse gas increases on climate for the planet as a whole and also for specific regions. If nothing is done to control greenhouse gas emissions and they continue to increase at current rates, the surface temperature of the Earth can be expected to increase between 0.5o C and 2.0o C (0.9o F and 3.6o F) by 2050 and between 2o and 4.5o C (3.5o and 8o F) by 2100, with CO2 levels over 800 parts per million (ppm). Global CO2 emissions are rising rapidly. The industrial revolution began about 1850 and industrialization has been ac- celerating. On the other hand, if severe limits on CO2 emissions begin soon, temperatures could rise less than 1.1o C (2o F) by 2100. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Whatever the temperature increase, it will not be uniform around the globe. A rise of 2.8o C (5o F) would result in 0.6o to 1.2o C (1o to 2o F) at the Equator, but up to 6.7o C (12o F) at the poles. So far, global warming has affected the North Pole more than the South Pole, but temperatures are still increasing at Antarctica (Figure 1.2). 	even an increase of global temperature of 1oc would make a difference to earths environment	true
Computer models are used to predict the effects of greenhouse gas increases on climate for the planet as a whole and also for specific regions. If nothing is done to control greenhouse gas emissions and they continue to increase at current rates, the surface temperature of the Earth can be expected to increase between 0.5o C and 2.0o C (0.9o F and 3.6o F) by 2050 and between 2o and 4.5o C (3.5o and 8o F) by 2100, with CO2 levels over 800 parts per million (ppm). Global CO2 emissions are rising rapidly. The industrial revolution began about 1850 and industrialization has been ac- celerating. On the other hand, if severe limits on CO2 emissions begin soon, temperatures could rise less than 1.1o C (2o F) by 2100. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Whatever the temperature increase, it will not be uniform around the globe. A rise of 2.8o C (5o F) would result in 0.6o to 1.2o C (1o to 2o F) at the Equator, but up to 6.7o C (12o F) at the poles. So far, global warming has affected the North Pole more than the South Pole, but temperatures are still increasing at Antarctica (Figure 1.2). 	global warming has affected the south pole more than the north pole	false
The amount CO2 levels will rise in the next decades is unknown. What will this number depend on in the developed nations? What will it depend on in the developing nations? In the developed nations it will depend on technological advances or lifestyle changes that decrease emissions. In the developing nations, it will depend on how much their lifestyles improve and how these improvements are made. If nothing is done to decrease the rate of CO2 emissions, by 2030, CO2 emissions are projected to be 63% greater than they were in 2002. 	temperatures are rising globally how much they rise in the future depends on our actions in the next decades	true
The amount CO2 levels will rise in the next decades is unknown. What will this number depend on in the developed nations? What will it depend on in the developing nations? In the developed nations it will depend on technological advances or lifestyle changes that decrease emissions. In the developing nations, it will depend on how much their lifestyles improve and how these improvements are made. If nothing is done to decrease the rate of CO2 emissions, by 2030, CO2 emissions are projected to be 63% greater than they were in 2002. 	a decrease in snow pack can cause a shortage of the summer water supply in many regions	true
The pollution at Love Canal was not initially visible, but it became visible. The health effects from the waste were also not initially visible, but they became clearly visible. The effects of the contamination that were seen in human health included sickness in children and a higher than normal number of miscarriages in pregnant women. Toxic chemicals may cause cancer and birth defects. Why do you think children and fetuses are more susceptible? Because young organisms grow more rapidly, they take in more of the toxic chemicals and are more affected. 	at love canal people were told of the toxic chemicals buried beneath their homes and school when the community was built	false
Lead and mercury are two chemicals that are especially toxic to humans. Lead was once a common ingredient in gasoline and paint, but it was shown to damage human brains and nervous systems. Since young children are growing rapidly, lead is especially harmful in children under the age of six (Figure 1.2). In the 1970s and 1980s, the United States government passed laws completely banning lead in gasoline and paint. Homes built before the 1970s may contain lead paint. Paint so old is likely to be peeling and poses a great threat to human health. About 200 children die every year from lead poisoning. (a) Leaded gasoline. (b) Leaded paint. Mercury is a pollutant that can easily spread around the world. Sources of mercury include volcanic eruptions, coal burning, and wastes such as batteries, electronic switches, and electronic appliances such as television sets. Like lead, mercury damages the brain and impairs nervous system function. More about the hazards of mercury pollution can be found later in this concept. 	lead poisoning was a problem in the 1970s and 1980s but that has been cleaned up	false
As part of the hydrologic cycle, water spends a lot of time in the atmosphere, mostly as water vapor. The atmosphere is an important reservoir for water. Chlorophyll indicates the presence of photosynthesizing plants as does the veg- etation index. 	the atmosphere is a reservoir for water	true
The atmosphere is made of gases that take up space and transmit energy. Sound waves are among the types of energy that travel though the atmosphere. Without an atmosphere, we could not hear a single sound. Earth would be as silent as outer space (explosions in movies about space should be silent). Of course, no insect, bird, or airplane would be able to fly, because there would be no atmosphere to hold it up. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	in space no one can hear you scream because there is not medium for the sound waves to travel through	true
As part of the hydrologic cycle, water spends a lot of time in the atmosphere, mostly as water vapor. The atmosphere is an important reservoir for water. Chlorophyll indicates the presence of photosynthesizing plants as does the veg- etation index. 	the red chlorophyll hotspots on the chlorophyll map are directly related to the excess nutrients in those areas	true
The oceans are home to an enormous amount of life. That is, they have tremendous biodiversity (Figure 1.1). Tiny ocean plants, called phytoplankton, create the base of a food web that supports all sorts of life forms. Marine life makes up the majority of all biomass on Earth. (Biomass is the total mass of living organisms in a given area.) These organisms supply us with food and even the oxygen created by marine plants. Polar bears are well adapted to frigid Arc- tic waters. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	biodiversity is the total mass of living organisms in a region	false
The oceans, along with the atmosphere, keep temperatures fairly constant worldwide. While some places on Earth get as cold as -70o C and others as hot as 55o C, the range is only 125o C. On Mercury temperatures go from -180o C to 430o C, a range of 610o C. The oceans, along with the atmosphere, distribute heat around the planet. The oceans absorb heat near the Equator and then move that solar energy to more polar regions. The oceans also moderate climate within a region. At the same latitude, the temperature range is smaller in lands nearer the oceans than away from the oceans. Summer temperatures are not as hot, and winter temperatures are not as cold, because water takes a long time to heat up or cool down. 	temperature range is smaller on land near a large water body than on land far from a large water body	true
The oceans are an essential part of Earths water cycle. Since they cover so much of the planet, most evaporation comes from oceans and most precipitation falls on oceans. 	the oceans important to the water cycle because most evaporation comes from and precipitation falls on the oceans	true
The oceans, along with the atmosphere, keep temperatures fairly constant worldwide. While some places on Earth get as cold as -70o C and others as hot as 55o C, the range is only 125o C. On Mercury temperatures go from -180o C to 430o C, a range of 610o C. The oceans, along with the atmosphere, distribute heat around the planet. The oceans absorb heat near the Equator and then move that solar energy to more polar regions. The oceans also moderate climate within a region. At the same latitude, the temperature range is smaller in lands nearer the oceans than away from the oceans. Summer temperatures are not as hot, and winter temperatures are not as cold, because water takes a long time to heat up or cool down. 	the range of temperatures on earth is much less than the range in temperatures on mercury	true
Different rock types weather at different rates. Certain types of rock are very resistant to weathering. Igneous rocks, especially intrusive igneous rocks such as granite, weather slowly because it is hard for water to penetrate them. Other types of rock, such as limestone, are easily weathered because they dissolve in weak acids. Rocks that resist weathering remain at the surface and form ridges or hills. Shiprock in New Mexico is the throat of a volcano thats left after the rest of the volcano eroded away. The rock thats left behind is magma that cooled relatively slowly and is harder than the rock that had surrounded it. Different minerals also weather at different rates. Some minerals in a rock might completely dissolve in water, but the more resistant minerals remain. In this case, the rocks surface becomes pitted and rough. When a less resistant mineral dissolves, more resistant mineral grains are released from the rock. A beautiful example of this effect is the "Stone Forest" in China, see the video below: The Shiprock formation in northwest New Mexico is the central plug of resistant lava from which the surrounding rock weath- ered and eroded away. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	igneous rocks weather faster than most other rocks because they formed in conditions that are the most different from surface conditions	false
A regions climate strongly influences weathering. Climate is determined by the temperature of a region plus the amount of precipitation it receives. Climate is weather averaged over a long period of time. Chemical weathering increases as: Temperature increases: Chemical reactions proceed more rapidly at higher temperatures. For each 10o C increase in average temperature, the rate of chemical reactions doubles. Precipitation increases: More water allows more chemical reactions. Since water participates in both mechan- ical and chemical weathering, more water strongly increases weathering. So how do different climates influence weathering? A cold, dry climate will produce the lowest rate of weathering. A warm, wet climate will produce the highest rate of weathering. The warmer a climate is, the more types of vegetation it will have and the greater the rate of biological weathering (Figure 1.2). This happens because plants and bacteria grow and multiply faster in warmer temperatures. 	chemical reactions proceed more rapidly at higher temperatures	true
Different rock types weather at different rates. Certain types of rock are very resistant to weathering. Igneous rocks, especially intrusive igneous rocks such as granite, weather slowly because it is hard for water to penetrate them. Other types of rock, such as limestone, are easily weathered because they dissolve in weak acids. Rocks that resist weathering remain at the surface and form ridges or hills. Shiprock in New Mexico is the throat of a volcano thats left after the rest of the volcano eroded away. The rock thats left behind is magma that cooled relatively slowly and is harder than the rock that had surrounded it. Different minerals also weather at different rates. Some minerals in a rock might completely dissolve in water, but the more resistant minerals remain. In this case, the rocks surface becomes pitted and rough. When a less resistant mineral dissolves, more resistant mineral grains are released from the rock. A beautiful example of this effect is the "Stone Forest" in China, see the video below: The Shiprock formation in northwest New Mexico is the central plug of resistant lava from which the surrounding rock weath- ered and eroded away. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	when a less resistant mineral dissolves more resistant mineral grains are released from rock	true
Some resources are concentrated by weathering processes. In tropical climates, intense chemical weathering carries away all soluble minerals, leaving behind just the least soluble components. The aluminum oxide, bauxite, forms this way and is our main source of aluminum ore. 	precipitation increases both mechanical and chemical weathering	true
The four planets farthest from the Sun are the outer planets. Figure 1.2 shows the relative sizes of the outer planets and the Sun. These planets are much larger than the inner planets and are made primarily of gases and liquids, so they are also called gas giants. The gas giants are made up primarily of hydrogen and helium, the same elements that make up most of the Sun. Astronomers think that hydrogen and helium gases comprised much of the solar system when it first formed. Since the inner planets didnt have enough mass to hold on to these light gases, their hydrogen and helium floated away into space. The Sun and the massive outer planets had enough gravity to keep hydrogen and helium from drifting away. All of the outer planets have numerous moons. They all also have planetary rings, composed of dust and other small particles that encircle the planet in a thin plane. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  This image shows the four outer planets and the Sun, with sizes to scale. From left to right, the outer planets are Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. 	together all of the planets equal the mass of the sun	false
The inner planets, or terrestrial planets, are the four planets closest to the Sun: Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars. Figure 1.1 shows the relative sizes of these four inner planets. Unlike the outer planets, which have many satellites, Mercury and Venus do not have moons, Earth has one, and Mars has two. Of course, the inner planets have shorter orbits around the Sun, and they all spin more slowly. Geologically, the inner planets are all made of cooled igneous rock with iron cores, and all have been geologically active, at least early in their history. None of the inner planets has rings. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  This composite shows the relative sizes of the four inner planets. From left to right, they are Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars. 	all of the inner planets were geologically active at some time in their history	true
The four planets farthest from the Sun are the outer planets. Figure 1.2 shows the relative sizes of the outer planets and the Sun. These planets are much larger than the inner planets and are made primarily of gases and liquids, so they are also called gas giants. The gas giants are made up primarily of hydrogen and helium, the same elements that make up most of the Sun. Astronomers think that hydrogen and helium gases comprised much of the solar system when it first formed. Since the inner planets didnt have enough mass to hold on to these light gases, their hydrogen and helium floated away into space. The Sun and the massive outer planets had enough gravity to keep hydrogen and helium from drifting away. All of the outer planets have numerous moons. They all also have planetary rings, composed of dust and other small particles that encircle the planet in a thin plane. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  This image shows the four outer planets and the Sun, with sizes to scale. From left to right, the outer planets are Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. 	saturn is unique in the solar system because it is the only planet with rings	false
Fossils are our best form of evidence about Earth history, including the history of life. Along with other geological evidence from rocks and structures, fossils even give us clues about past climates, the motions of plates, and other major geological events. Since the present is the key to the past, what we know about a type of organism that lives today can be applied to past environments. 	the sun is a ball of material with no layers and no outer boundary	false
Fossils are our best form of evidence about Earth history, including the history of life. Along with other geological evidence from rocks and structures, fossils even give us clues about past climates, the motions of plates, and other major geological events. Since the present is the key to the past, what we know about a type of organism that lives today can be applied to past environments. 	when the moon blocks out the sun in a solar eclipse we can still see the corona	true
Fossils are our best form of evidence about Earth history, including the history of life. Along with other geological evidence from rocks and structures, fossils even give us clues about past climates, the motions of plates, and other major geological events. Since the present is the key to the past, what we know about a type of organism that lives today can be applied to past environments. 	the temperature of the sun is highest in the central plasma core	true
Groundwater resides in aquifers, porous rock and sediment with water in between. Water is attracted to the soil particles, and capillary action, which describes how water moves through porous media, moves water from wet soil to dry areas. Aquifers are found at different depths. Some are just below the surface and some are found much deeper below the land surface. A region may have more than one aquifer beneath it and even most deserts are above aquifers. The source region for an aquifer beneath a desert is likely to be far away, perhaps in a mountainous area. 	unconfined aquifers are open to the surface	true
Groundwater resides in aquifers, porous rock and sediment with water in between. Water is attracted to the soil particles, and capillary action, which describes how water moves through porous media, moves water from wet soil to dry areas. Aquifers are found at different depths. Some are just below the surface and some are found much deeper below the land surface. A region may have more than one aquifer beneath it and even most deserts are above aquifers. The source region for an aquifer beneath a desert is likely to be far away, perhaps in a mountainous area. 	if a shallow well runs dry a deeper well will likely tap another aquifer	true
The residence time of water in a groundwater aquifer can be from minutes to thousands of years. Groundwater is often called fossil water because it has remained in the ground for so long, often since the end of the ice ages. A diagram of groundwater flow through aquifers showing residence times. Deeper aquifers typically contain older "fossil water." Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	most groundwater has been in an aquifer for millennia	false
The residence time of water in a groundwater aquifer can be from minutes to thousands of years. Groundwater is often called fossil water because it has remained in the ground for so long, often since the end of the ice ages. A diagram of groundwater flow through aquifers showing residence times. Deeper aquifers typically contain older "fossil water." Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	access to groundwater can only be gotten from wells	false
The rate at which magma cools determines whether an igneous rock is intrusive or extrusive. The cooling rate is reflected in the rocks texture. 	igneous intrusive rock has visible crystals because it cools and solidifies slowly	true
The rate at which magma cools determines whether an igneous rock is intrusive or extrusive. The cooling rate is reflected in the rocks texture. 	a pluton is a large igneous rock that cooled inside the crust	true
The rate at which magma cools determines whether an igneous rock is intrusive or extrusive. The cooling rate is reflected in the rocks texture. 	if a rock is cooling in a magma chamber for a while and then suddenly erupts it will have a porphyritic texture	true
The rate at which magma cools determines whether an igneous rock is intrusive or extrusive. The cooling rate is reflected in the rocks texture. 	lava that cools extremely rapidly may have a crystalline texture	false
Jupiter is enormous, the largest object in the solar system besides the Sun. Although Jupiter is over 1,300 times Earths volume, it has only 318 times the mass of Earth. Like the other gas giants, it is much less dense than Earth. Because Jupiter is so large, it reflects a lot of sunlight. Jupiter is extremely bright in the night sky; only the Moon and Venus are brighter (Figure 1.1). This brightness is all the more impressive because Jupiter is quite far from the Earth  5.20 AUs away. It takes Jupiter about 12 Earth years to orbit once around the Sun. 	jupiter is so large that it makes its own light	false
Jupiter is enormous, the largest object in the solar system besides the Sun. Although Jupiter is over 1,300 times Earths volume, it has only 318 times the mass of Earth. Like the other gas giants, it is much less dense than Earth. Because Jupiter is so large, it reflects a lot of sunlight. Jupiter is extremely bright in the night sky; only the Moon and Venus are brighter (Figure 1.1). This brightness is all the more impressive because Jupiter is quite far from the Earth  5.20 AUs away. It takes Jupiter about 12 Earth years to orbit once around the Sun. 	jupiter is 52 times as from the sun as the earth is	true
As glaciers flow, mechanical weathering loosens rock on the valley walls, which falls as debris on the glacier. Glaciers can carry rock of any size, from giant boulders to silt (Figure 1.6). These rocks can be carried for many kilometers for many years. 	glaciers can carry rocks of any size	true
Several types of stratified deposits form in glacial regions but are not formed directly by the ice. Varves form where lakes are covered by ice in the winter. Dark, fine-grained clays sink to the bottom in winter, but melting ice in spring brings running water that deposits lighter colored sands. Each alternating dark/light layer represents one year of deposits. (a) An esker is a winding ridge of sand and gravel deposited under a glacier by a stream of meltwater. (b) A drumlin is an asymmetrical hill made of sediments that points in the direction the ice moved. Usually drumlins are found in groups called drumlin fields. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	varves display an annual cycle of dark fine clays deposited in winter and lighter sands deposited in spring	true
Groundwater carries dissolved minerals in solution. The minerals may then be deposited, for example, as stalag- mites or stalactites (Figure 1.4). Stalactites form as calcium carbonate drips from the ceiling of a cave, forming beautiful icicle-like formations. The word stalactite has a c, and it forms from the ceiling. Stalagmites form as calcium carbonate drips from the ceiling to the floor of a cave and then grow upwards. The g in stalagmite means it forms on the ground. If a stalactite and stalagmite join together, they form a column. One of the wonders of visiting a cave is to witness the beauty of these amazing and strangely captivating structures. Some of the largest, and most beautiful, natural crystals can be found in the Naica mine, in Mexico. These gypsum crystals were formed over thousands of years as groundwater, rich in calcium and sulfur flowed through an underground cave. Check it out: A relatively small sinkhole in a Georgia parking lot. Stalactites hang from the ceiling and stalagmites rise from the floor of Carlsbad Caverns in New Mexico. The large stalagmite on the right is almost tall enough to reach the ceiling (or a stalactite) and form a column. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	engineers can build structures that will protect our shorelines come what may	false
Accumulated sediments harden into rock by lithification, as illustrated in the Figure 1.1. Two important steps are needed for sediments to lithify. 1. Sediments are squeezed together by the weight of overlying sediments on top of them. This is called com- paction. Cemented, non-organic sediments become clastic rocks. If organic material is included, they are bioclastic rocks. 2. Fluids fill in the spaces between the loose particles of sediment and crystallize to create a rock by cementation. The sediment size in clastic sedimentary rocks varies greatly (see Table in Sedimentary Rocks Classification). This cliff is made of sandstone. Sands were deposited and then lithified. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	clastic rocks contain fragments of preexisting rock	true
Accumulated sediments harden into rock by lithification, as illustrated in the Figure 1.1. Two important steps are needed for sediments to lithify. 1. Sediments are squeezed together by the weight of overlying sediments on top of them. This is called com- paction. Cemented, non-organic sediments become clastic rocks. If organic material is included, they are bioclastic rocks. 2. Fluids fill in the spaces between the loose particles of sediment and crystallize to create a rock by cementation. The sediment size in clastic sedimentary rocks varies greatly (see Table in Sedimentary Rocks Classification). This cliff is made of sandstone. Sands were deposited and then lithified. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	a mudstone that contains shell fragments is a bioclastic rock	true
Accumulated sediments harden into rock by lithification, as illustrated in the Figure 1.1. Two important steps are needed for sediments to lithify. 1. Sediments are squeezed together by the weight of overlying sediments on top of them. This is called com- paction. Cemented, non-organic sediments become clastic rocks. If organic material is included, they are bioclastic rocks. 2. Fluids fill in the spaces between the loose particles of sediment and crystallize to create a rock by cementation. The sediment size in clastic sedimentary rocks varies greatly (see Table in Sedimentary Rocks Classification). This cliff is made of sandstone. Sands were deposited and then lithified. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	compaction is when cement from fluids bind sediments together	false
Accumulated sediments harden into rock by lithification, as illustrated in the Figure 1.1. Two important steps are needed for sediments to lithify. 1. Sediments are squeezed together by the weight of overlying sediments on top of them. This is called com- paction. Cemented, non-organic sediments become clastic rocks. If organic material is included, they are bioclastic rocks. 2. Fluids fill in the spaces between the loose particles of sediment and crystallize to create a rock by cementation. The sediment size in clastic sedimentary rocks varies greatly (see Table in Sedimentary Rocks Classification). This cliff is made of sandstone. Sands were deposited and then lithified. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	sandstone is a type of clastic rock	true
A look on a reliable website shows us that Old Faithful Geyser is located at N44o 27 43. What does this mean? Latitude tells the distance north or south of the Equator. Latitude lines start at the Equator and circle around the planet. The North Pole is 90o N, with 90 degree lines in the Northern Hemisphere. Old Faithful is at 44 degrees, 27 minutes and 43 seconds north of the Equator. Thats just about exactly half way between the Equator and the North Pole! 	a latitude of 44o2743 should be followed by an n or s	true
Direction is important if you want to go between two places. Directions are expressed as north (N), east (E), south (S), and west (W), with gradations in between. The most common way to describe direction in relation to the Earths surface is with a compass, a device with a floating needle that is actually a small magnet. The compass needle aligns itself with the Earths magnetic north pole. Since the magnetic north pole is 11.5 degrees offset from its geographic north pole on the axis of rotation, you must correct for this discrepancy. Map of the Visitor Center at Old Faithful, Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming. Without using a compass, we can say that to get to Old Faithful, you enter Yellowstone National Park at the South Entrance, drive north-northeast to West Thumb, and then drive west-northwest to Old Faithful. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	earths magnetic north pole and geographic north pole are located at the point where earths axis of rotation intersects the surface	false
How would you find Old Faithful? One way is by using latitude and longitude. Any location on Earths surface or on a map  can be described using these coordinates. Latitude and longitude are expressed as degrees that are divided into 60 minutes. Each minute is divided into 60 seconds. 	a longitude of 44o2743 should be followed by an n or s	false
Direction is important if you want to go between two places. Directions are expressed as north (N), east (E), south (S), and west (W), with gradations in between. The most common way to describe direction in relation to the Earths surface is with a compass, a device with a floating needle that is actually a small magnet. The compass needle aligns itself with the Earths magnetic north pole. Since the magnetic north pole is 11.5 degrees offset from its geographic north pole on the axis of rotation, you must correct for this discrepancy. Map of the Visitor Center at Old Faithful, Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming. Without using a compass, we can say that to get to Old Faithful, you enter Yellowstone National Park at the South Entrance, drive north-northeast to West Thumb, and then drive west-northwest to Old Faithful. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	a compass is a device with a floating needle that acts as a magnet point to magnetic north	true
Since greenhouse gases trap the heat that radiates off the planets surfaces, what would happen to global temperatures if atmospheric greenhouse gas levels decreased? What if greenhouse gases increased? A decrease in greenhouse gas levels decreases global temperature and an increase raises global temperature. Greenhouse gas levels have varied throughout Earth history. For example, CO2 has been present at concentrations less than 200 parts per million (ppm) and more than 5,000 ppm. But for at least 650,000 years, CO2 has never risen above 300 ppm, during either glacial or interglacial periods (Figure 1.3). Natural processes add and remove CO2 from the atmosphere. Processes that add CO2 : volcanic eruptions decay or burning of organic matter. Processes that remove CO2 : absorption by plant and animal tissue. When plants are turned into fossil fuels, the CO2 in their tissue is stored with them. So CO2 is removed from the atmosphere. What does this do to Earths average temperature? What happens to atmospheric CO2 when the fossil fuels are burned? What happens to global temperatures? CO2 levels during glacial (blue) and inter- glacial (yellow) periods. Are CO2 levels relatively high or relatively low during in- terglacial periods? Current carbon diox- ide levels are at around 400 ppm, the highest level for the last 650,000 years. BP means years before present. 	carbon dioxide and methane levels in the atmosphere are correlated with temperature	true
The amount of energy the Sun radiates is variable. Sunspots are magnetic storms on the Suns surface that increase and decrease over an 11-year cycle (Figure 1.1). When the number of sunspots is high, solar radiation is also relatively high. But the entire variation in solar radiation is tiny relative to the total amount of solar radiation that there is, and there is no known 11-year cycle in climate variability. The Little Ice Age corresponded to a time when there were no sunspots on the Sun. Sunspots on the face of the Sun. 	the climate cycle correlates with the sunspot cycle	false
Many processes can cause climate to change. These include changes: In the amount of energy the Sun produces over years. In the positions of the continents over millions of years. In the tilt of Earths axis and orbit over thousands of years. That are sudden and dramatic because of random catastrophic events, such as a large asteroid impact. In greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, caused naturally or by human activities. 	when earths axis has less different in its tilt climate is more moderate throughout the year	true
The amount of energy the Sun radiates is variable. Sunspots are magnetic storms on the Suns surface that increase and decrease over an 11-year cycle (Figure 1.1). When the number of sunspots is high, solar radiation is also relatively high. But the entire variation in solar radiation is tiny relative to the total amount of solar radiation that there is, and there is no known 11-year cycle in climate variability. The Little Ice Age corresponded to a time when there were no sunspots on the Sun. Sunspots on the face of the Sun. 	ice ages happen predictably on a 100000 year cycle that correlates with milankovitch cycles	false
On our transit to the Mid-Atlantic ridge, we tow a magnetometer behind the ship. Shipboard magnetometers reveal the magnetic polarity of the rock beneath them. The practice of towing a magnetometer began during WWII when navy ships towed magnetometers to search for enemy submarines. When scientists plotted the points of normal and reversed polarity on a seafloor map they made an astonishing discovery: the normal and reversed magnetic polarity of seafloor basalts creates a pattern. Stripes of normal polarity and reversed polarity alternate across the ocean bottom. Stripes form mirror images on either side of the mid-ocean ridges (Figure 1.1). Stripes end abruptly at the edges of continents, sometimes at a deep sea trench (Figure 1.2). The magnetic stripes are what created the Figure 1.1. Research cruises today tow magnetometers to add detail to existing magnetic polarity data. 	submarines during wwii discovered the magnetic patterns on the seafloor	false
On our transit to the Mid-Atlantic ridge, we tow a magnetometer behind the ship. Shipboard magnetometers reveal the magnetic polarity of the rock beneath them. The practice of towing a magnetometer began during WWII when navy ships towed magnetometers to search for enemy submarines. When scientists plotted the points of normal and reversed polarity on a seafloor map they made an astonishing discovery: the normal and reversed magnetic polarity of seafloor basalts creates a pattern. Stripes of normal polarity and reversed polarity alternate across the ocean bottom. Stripes form mirror images on either side of the mid-ocean ridges (Figure 1.1). Stripes end abruptly at the edges of continents, sometimes at a deep sea trench (Figure 1.2). The magnetic stripes are what created the Figure 1.1. Research cruises today tow magnetometers to add detail to existing magnetic polarity data. 	the magnetic stripes on either side of the midocean ridge the same distance out from the ridge have opposite polarity	false
By combining magnetic polarity data from rocks on land and on the seafloor with radiometric age dating and fossil ages, scientists came up with a time scale for the magnetic reversals. The first four magnetic periods are: Brunhes normal - present to 730,000 years ago. Matuyama reverse - 730,000 years ago to 2.48 million years ago. Gauss normal - 2.48 to 3.4 million years ago. Gilbert reverse - 3.4 to 5.3 million years ago. The scientists noticed that the rocks got older with distance from the mid-ocean ridges. The youngest rocks were located at the ridge crest and the oldest rocks were located the farthest away, abutting continents. Scientists also noticed that the characteristics of the rocks and sediments changed with distance from the ridge axis as seen in the Table 1.1. Rock ages At ridge axis With distance from axis youngest becomes older Sediment thickness none becomes thicker Crust thickness Heat flow thinnest becomes thicker hottest becomes cooler Away from the ridge crest, sediment becomes older and thicker, and the seafloor becomes thicker. Heat flow, which indicates the warmth of a region, is highest at the ridge crest. The oldest seafloor is near the edges of continents or deep sea trenches and is less than 180 million years old (Figure something was happening to the older seafloor. Seafloor is youngest at the mid-ocean ridges and becomes progressively older with distance from the ridge. How can you explain the observations that scientists have made in the oceans? Why is rock younger at the ridge and oldest at the farthest points from the ridge? The scientists suggested that seafloor was being created at the ridge. Since the planet is not getting larger, they suggested that it is destroyed in a relatively short amount of geologic time. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the oldest seafloor is less than 180 million years old	true
On our transit to the Mid-Atlantic ridge, we tow a magnetometer behind the ship. Shipboard magnetometers reveal the magnetic polarity of the rock beneath them. The practice of towing a magnetometer began during WWII when navy ships towed magnetometers to search for enemy submarines. When scientists plotted the points of normal and reversed polarity on a seafloor map they made an astonishing discovery: the normal and reversed magnetic polarity of seafloor basalts creates a pattern. Stripes of normal polarity and reversed polarity alternate across the ocean bottom. Stripes form mirror images on either side of the mid-ocean ridges (Figure 1.1). Stripes end abruptly at the edges of continents, sometimes at a deep sea trench (Figure 1.2). The magnetic stripes are what created the Figure 1.1. Research cruises today tow magnetometers to add detail to existing magnetic polarity data. 	observations of the seafloor support the idea that new seafloor is created at mid ocean ridges	true
How does this help you to provide evidence for continental drift? To test the idea that the pole remained fixed but the continents moved, geologists fitted the continents together as Wegener had done. It worked! There has only been one magnetic north pole and the continents have drifted (Figure 1.4). They named the phenomenon of the magnetic pole that seemed to move but actually did not apparent polar wander. On the left: The apparent north pole for Europe and North America if the continents were always in their current locations. The two paths merge into one if the continents are allowed to drift. This evidence for continental drift gave geologists renewed interest in understanding how continents could move about on the planets surface. 	wegener died without knowing that continental drift was accepted	true
Geologists noted important things about the magnetic polarity of different aged rocks on the same continent: Magnetite crystals in fresh volcanic rocks point to the current magnetic north pole (Figure 1.2) no matter what continent or where on the continent the rocks are located. Older rocks that are the same age and are located on the same continent point to the same location, but that location is not the current north magnetic pole. Older rocks that are of different ages do not point to the same locations or to the current magnetic north pole. In other words, although the magnetite crystals were pointing to the magnetic north pole, the location of the pole seemed to wander. Scientists were amazed to find that the north magnetic pole changed location over time (Figure Can you figure out the three possible explanations for this? They are: The location of the north magnetic north pole 80 million years before present (mybp), then 60, 40, 20, and now. 1. The continents remained fixed and the north magnetic pole moved. 2. The north magnetic pole stood still and the continents moved. 3. Both the continents and the north pole moved. 	magnetite crystals in young volcanic rocks point to the geographic north pole	false
How do you figure out which of those three possibilities is correct? You decide to look at magnetic rocks on different continents. Geologists noted that for rocks of the same age but on different continents, the little magnets pointed to different magnetic north poles. 400 million-year-old magnetite in Europe pointed to a different north magnetic pole than magnetite of the same age in North America. 250 million years ago, the north poles were also different for the two continents. Now look again at the three possible explanations. Only one can be correct. If the continents had remained fixed while the north magnetic pole moved, there must have been two separate north poles. Since there is only one north pole today, what is the best explanation? The only reasonable explanation is that the magnetic north pole has remained fixed but that the continents have moved. 	if the continents remained fixed while the magnetic pole moved there must have been two separate magnetic north poles	true
How do you figure out which of those three possibilities is correct? You decide to look at magnetic rocks on different continents. Geologists noted that for rocks of the same age but on different continents, the little magnets pointed to different magnetic north poles. 400 million-year-old magnetite in Europe pointed to a different north magnetic pole than magnetite of the same age in North America. 250 million years ago, the north poles were also different for the two continents. Now look again at the three possible explanations. Only one can be correct. If the continents had remained fixed while the north magnetic pole moved, there must have been two separate north poles. Since there is only one north pole today, what is the best explanation? The only reasonable explanation is that the magnetic north pole has remained fixed but that the continents have moved. 	there is and was only one magnetic north pole	true
A bathymetric map is like a topographic map with the contour lines representing depth below sea level, rather than height above. Numbers are low near sea level and become higher with depth. Kilauea is the youngest volcano found above sea level in Hawaii. On the flank of Kilauea is an even younger volcano called Loihi. The bathymetric map pictured in the Figure 1.2 shows the form of Loihi. Loihi volcano growing on the flank of Kilauea volcano in Hawaii. Black lines in the inset show the land surface above sea level and blue lines show the topography below sea level. A geologic map of the region around Old Faithful, Yellowstone National Park. 	a bathymetric map represents the depth below sea level	true
A bathymetric map is like a topographic map with the contour lines representing depth below sea level, rather than height above. Numbers are low near sea level and become higher with depth. Kilauea is the youngest volcano found above sea level in Hawaii. On the flank of Kilauea is an even younger volcano called Loihi. The bathymetric map pictured in the Figure 1.2 shows the form of Loihi. Loihi volcano growing on the flank of Kilauea volcano in Hawaii. Black lines in the inset show the land surface above sea level and blue lines show the topography below sea level. A geologic map of the region around Old Faithful, Yellowstone National Park. 	on a bathymetric map numbers are negative because they represent depth below sea level	true
A bathymetric map is like a topographic map with the contour lines representing depth below sea level, rather than height above. Numbers are low near sea level and become higher with depth. Kilauea is the youngest volcano found above sea level in Hawaii. On the flank of Kilauea is an even younger volcano called Loihi. The bathymetric map pictured in the Figure 1.2 shows the form of Loihi. Loihi volcano growing on the flank of Kilauea volcano in Hawaii. Black lines in the inset show the land surface above sea level and blue lines show the topography below sea level. A geologic map of the region around Old Faithful, Yellowstone National Park. 	contour lines cross on very steep slopes	false
Viewed from Earth, Mars is reddish in color. The ancient Greeks and Romans named the planet after the god of war. The surface is not red from blood but from large amounts of iron oxide in the soil. The Martian atmosphere is very thin relative to Earths and has much lower atmospheric pressure. Although the atmosphere is made up mostly of carbon dioxide, the planet has only a weak greenhouse effect, so temperatures are only slightly higher than if the planet had no atmosphere. 	mars is the only planet that humans have walked on	false
Mars has mountains, canyons, and other features similar to Earth. Some of these surface features are amazing for their size! Olympus Mons is a shield volcano, similar to the volcanoes that make up the Hawaiian Islands. But Olympus Mons is also the largest mountain in the solar system (Figure 1.2). Mars also has the largest canyon in the solar system, Valles Marineris (Figure 1.3). 	the largest canyon in the solar system called valles marineris is found on mars	true
Mars has mountains, canyons, and other features similar to Earth. Some of these surface features are amazing for their size! Olympus Mons is a shield volcano, similar to the volcanoes that make up the Hawaiian Islands. But Olympus Mons is also the largest mountain in the solar system (Figure 1.2). Mars also has the largest canyon in the solar system, Valles Marineris (Figure 1.3). 	mars has active plate tectonics	false
Mars has mountains, canyons, and other features similar to Earth. Some of these surface features are amazing for their size! Olympus Mons is a shield volcano, similar to the volcanoes that make up the Hawaiian Islands. But Olympus Mons is also the largest mountain in the solar system (Figure 1.2). Mars also has the largest canyon in the solar system, Valles Marineris (Figure 1.3). 	microbial life has been found in the ices of mars	false
A seismograph produces a graph-like representation of the seismic waves it receives and records them onto a seismogram (Figure 1.1). Seismograms contain information that can be used to determine how strong an earthquake was, how long it lasted, and how far away it was. Modern seismometers record ground motions using electronic motion detectors. The data are then kept digitally on a computer. If a seismogram records P-waves and surface waves but not S-waves, the seismograph was on the other side of the Earth from the earthquake. The amplitude of the waves can be used to determine the magnitude of the earthquake, which will be discussed in a later section. 	a seismogram produces a graphlike representation of the seismic waves it receives and records them onto a seismograph	false
A seismograph produces a graph-like representation of the seismic waves it receives and records them onto a seismogram (Figure 1.1). Seismograms contain information that can be used to determine how strong an earthquake was, how long it lasted, and how far away it was. Modern seismometers record ground motions using electronic motion detectors. The data are then kept digitally on a computer. If a seismogram records P-waves and surface waves but not S-waves, the seismograph was on the other side of the Earth from the earthquake. The amplitude of the waves can be used to determine the magnitude of the earthquake, which will be discussed in a later section. 	the wavelength of the waves can be used to determine the magnitude of an earthquake	false
There are many ways that rocks can be broken apart into smaller pieces. Ice wedging is the main form of mechanical weathering in any climate that regularly cycles above and below the freezing point (Figure 1.1). Ice wedging works quickly, breaking apart rocks in areas with temperatures that cycle above and below freezing in the day and night, and also that cycle above and below freezing with the seasons. Ice wedging breaks apart so much rock that large piles of broken rock are seen at the base of a hillside, as rock fragments separate and tumble down. Ice wedging is common in Earths polar regions and mid latitudes, and also at higher elevations, such as in the mountains. 	ice wedging is common at where temperatures commonly vary between above and below freezing	true
Mercury is named for the Roman messenger god, who could run extremely quickly, just as the planet moves very quickly in its orbit around the Sun. A year on Mercury  the length of time it takes to orbit the Sun  is just 88 Earth days. Despite its very short years, Mercury has very long days. A day is defined as the time it takes a planet to turn on its axis. Mercury rotates slowly on its axis, turning exactly three times for every two times it orbits the Sun. Therefore, each day on Mercury is 57 Earth days long. In other words, on Mercury, a year is only a Mercury day and a half long! 	planet mercury was named for the roman god mercury because it appears to travel rapidly across the face of the sun	true
Figure 1.3 shows a diagram of Mercurys interior. Mercury is one of the densest planets. Its relatively large, liquid core, made mostly of melted iron, takes up about 42% of the planets volume. 	on mercury each year lasts only 112 days	true
Mercury is named for the Roman messenger god, who could run extremely quickly, just as the planet moves very quickly in its orbit around the Sun. A year on Mercury  the length of time it takes to orbit the Sun  is just 88 Earth days. Despite its very short years, Mercury has very long days. A day is defined as the time it takes a planet to turn on its axis. Mercury rotates slowly on its axis, turning exactly three times for every two times it orbits the Sun. Therefore, each day on Mercury is 57 Earth days long. In other words, on Mercury, a year is only a Mercury day and a half long! 	mercury is the closest planet to earth	false
Mercury is named for the Roman messenger god, who could run extremely quickly, just as the planet moves very quickly in its orbit around the Sun. A year on Mercury  the length of time it takes to orbit the Sun  is just 88 Earth days. Despite its very short years, Mercury has very long days. A day is defined as the time it takes a planet to turn on its axis. Mercury rotates slowly on its axis, turning exactly three times for every two times it orbits the Sun. Therefore, each day on Mercury is 57 Earth days long. In other words, on Mercury, a year is only a Mercury day and a half long! 	because mercury is so close to the sun the entire planet is scorching hot	false
Mercury is released into the atmosphere when coal is burned (Figure 1.1). But breathing the mercury is not harmful. In the atmosphere, the mercury forms small droplets that are deposited in water or sediments. 	mercury is a potent neurotoxin	true
Do you know why you are supposed to eat large predatory fish like tuna infrequently? It is because of the bioaccu- mulation of mercury in those species. Some pollutants remain in an organism throughout its life, a phenomenon called bioaccumulation. In this process, an organism accumulates the entire amount of a toxic compound that it consumes over its lifetime. Not all substances bioaccumulate. Can you name one that does not? Aspirin does not bioaccumulate; if it did, a person would quickly accumulate a toxic amount in her body. Compounds that bioaccumulate are usually stored in the organisms fat. In the sediments, bacteria convert the droplets to the hazardous compound methyl mercury. Bacteria and plankton store all of the mercury from all of the seawater they ingest (Figure 1.2). A small fish that eats bacteria and plankton accumulates all of the mercury from all of the tiny creatures it eats over its lifetime. A big fish accumulates all of the mercury from all of the small fish it eats over its lifetime. For a tuna at the top of the food chain, thats a lot of mercury. Historic increases of mercury in the atmo- sphere: blue is volcanic eruptions; brown, purple, and pink are human-caused. The red region shows the effect of industrial- ization on atmospheric mercury. So tuna pose a health hazard to anything that eats them because their bodies are so high in mercury. This is why the government recommends limits on the amount of tuna that people eat. Limiting intake of large predatory fish is especially important for children and pregnant women. If the mercury just stayed in a persons fat, it would not be harmful, but that fat is used when a woman is pregnant or nursing a baby. A person will also get the mercury into her system when she (or he) burns the fat while losing weight. 	all substances bioaccumulate	false
Mercury is released into the atmosphere when coal is burned (Figure 1.1). But breathing the mercury is not harmful. In the atmosphere, the mercury forms small droplets that are deposited in water or sediments. 	it is it better to eat fish that are low on the food chain than the large predatory fish because their bodies contain less mercury	true
The air in the mesosphere has extremely low density: 99.9% of the mass of the atmosphere is below the mesosphere. As a result, air pressure is very low (Figure 1.1). A person traveling through the mesosphere would experience severe burns from ultraviolet light since the ozone layer, which provides UV protection, is in the stratosphere below. There would be almost no oxygen for breathing. And, of course, your blood would boil at normal body temperature. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the pressure in the mesosphere is so low that the liquids would boil at normal body temperature	true
The air in the mesosphere has extremely low density: 99.9% of the mass of the atmosphere is below the mesosphere. As a result, air pressure is very low (Figure 1.1). A person traveling through the mesosphere would experience severe burns from ultraviolet light since the ozone layer, which provides UV protection, is in the stratosphere below. There would be almost no oxygen for breathing. And, of course, your blood would boil at normal body temperature. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	although the temperature of the mesosphere is extremely low a persons blood would boil at normal body temperature	true
The air in the mesosphere has extremely low density: 99.9% of the mass of the atmosphere is below the mesosphere. As a result, air pressure is very low (Figure 1.1). A person traveling through the mesosphere would experience severe burns from ultraviolet light since the ozone layer, which provides UV protection, is in the stratosphere below. There would be almost no oxygen for breathing. And, of course, your blood would boil at normal body temperature. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the highest temperature in the mesosphere is at the top which is 90oc	false
Table 1.1 shows some common metamorphic rocks and their original parent rock. Picture Rock Name Slate Type of Rock Foliated Metamorphic Comments Phyllite Foliated Metamorphism of slate, but under greater heat and pressure than slate Schist Foliated Often derived from meta- morphism of claystone or shale; metamorphosed under more heat and pres- sure than phyllite Gneiss Foliated Metamorphism of various different rocks, under ex- treme conditions of heat and pressure Hornfels Non-foliated Contact metamorphism of various different rock types Metamorphism of shale Picture Rock Name Comments Quartzite Type of Metamorphic Rock Non-foliated Marble Non-foliated Metamorphism of lime- stone Metaconglomerate Non-foliated Metamorphism of con- glomerate Metamorphism of quartz sandstone Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	hornfels quartzite and marble are all foliated	false
Table 1.1 shows some common metamorphic rocks and their original parent rock. Picture Rock Name Slate Type of Rock Foliated Metamorphic Comments Phyllite Foliated Metamorphism of slate, but under greater heat and pressure than slate Schist Foliated Often derived from meta- morphism of claystone or shale; metamorphosed under more heat and pres- sure than phyllite Gneiss Foliated Metamorphism of various different rocks, under ex- treme conditions of heat and pressure Hornfels Non-foliated Contact metamorphism of various different rock types Metamorphism of shale Picture Rock Name Comments Quartzite Type of Metamorphic Rock Non-foliated Marble Non-foliated Metamorphism of lime- stone Metaconglomerate Non-foliated Metamorphism of con- glomerate Metamorphism of quartz sandstone Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the more extreme the amount of metamorphism the easier it is to tell what the original rock was	false
Table 1.1 shows some common metamorphic rocks and their original parent rock. Picture Rock Name Slate Type of Rock Foliated Metamorphic Comments Phyllite Foliated Metamorphism of slate, but under greater heat and pressure than slate Schist Foliated Often derived from meta- morphism of claystone or shale; metamorphosed under more heat and pres- sure than phyllite Gneiss Foliated Metamorphism of various different rocks, under ex- treme conditions of heat and pressure Hornfels Non-foliated Contact metamorphism of various different rock types Metamorphism of shale Picture Rock Name Comments Quartzite Type of Metamorphic Rock Non-foliated Marble Non-foliated Metamorphism of lime- stone Metaconglomerate Non-foliated Metamorphism of con- glomerate Metamorphism of quartz sandstone Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	marble is metamorphosed sandstone	false
Table 1.1 shows some common metamorphic rocks and their original parent rock. Picture Rock Name Slate Type of Rock Foliated Metamorphic Comments Phyllite Foliated Metamorphism of slate, but under greater heat and pressure than slate Schist Foliated Often derived from meta- morphism of claystone or shale; metamorphosed under more heat and pres- sure than phyllite Gneiss Foliated Metamorphism of various different rocks, under ex- treme conditions of heat and pressure Hornfels Non-foliated Contact metamorphism of various different rock types Metamorphism of shale Picture Rock Name Comments Quartzite Type of Metamorphic Rock Non-foliated Marble Non-foliated Metamorphism of lime- stone Metaconglomerate Non-foliated Metamorphism of con- glomerate Metamorphism of quartz sandstone Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	metaconglomerate is nonfoliated and displays the pebbles that were part of it when it was a sedimentary rock	true
Extreme pressure may also lead to foliation, the flat layers that form in rocks as the rocks are squeezed by pressure (Figure 1.1). Foliation normally forms when pressure is exerted in only one direction. Metamorphic rocks may also be non-foliated. Quartzite and marble, shown in the concept "Metamorphic Rock Classification," are non-foliated. A foliated metamorphic rock. 	metamorphic rocks are altered by heat and pressure	true
Any type of rock - igneous, sedimentary, or metamorphic  can become a metamorphic rock. All that is needed is enough heat and/or pressure to alter the existing rocks physical or chemical makeup without melting the rock entirely. Rocks change during metamorphism because the minerals need to be stable under the new temperature and pressure conditions. The need for stability may cause the structure of minerals to rearrange and form new minerals. Ions may move between minerals to create minerals of different chemical composition. Hornfels, with its alternating bands of dark and light crystals, is a good example of how minerals rearrange themselves during metamorphism. Hornfels is shown in the table for the "Metamorphic Rock Classification" concept. 	minerals metamorphose because they need to be stable under new temperature and pressure conditions	true
Any type of rock - igneous, sedimentary, or metamorphic  can become a metamorphic rock. All that is needed is enough heat and/or pressure to alter the existing rocks physical or chemical makeup without melting the rock entirely. Rocks change during metamorphism because the minerals need to be stable under the new temperature and pressure conditions. The need for stability may cause the structure of minerals to rearrange and form new minerals. Ions may move between minerals to create minerals of different chemical composition. Hornfels, with its alternating bands of dark and light crystals, is a good example of how minerals rearrange themselves during metamorphism. Hornfels is shown in the table for the "Metamorphic Rock Classification" concept. 	the chemical composition of minerals changes during metamorphism because ions move between minerals	false
Any type of rock - igneous, sedimentary, or metamorphic  can become a metamorphic rock. All that is needed is enough heat and/or pressure to alter the existing rocks physical or chemical makeup without melting the rock entirely. Rocks change during metamorphism because the minerals need to be stable under the new temperature and pressure conditions. The need for stability may cause the structure of minerals to rearrange and form new minerals. Ions may move between minerals to create minerals of different chemical composition. Hornfels, with its alternating bands of dark and light crystals, is a good example of how minerals rearrange themselves during metamorphism. Hornfels is shown in the table for the "Metamorphic Rock Classification" concept. 	physical or chemical makeup but not both can change as a rock undergoes metamorphism	false
Although most meteors burn up in the atmosphere, larger meteoroids may strike the Earths surface to create a meteorite. Meteorites are valuable to scientists because they provide clues about our solar system. Many meteorites are from asteroids that formed when the solar system formed (Figure 1.2). A few meteorites are made of rocky material that is thought to have come from Mars when an asteroid impact shot material off the Martian surface and into space. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	if an asteroid hits mars bits can enter earths atmosphere as meteors	true
A meteor, such as in Figure 1.1, is a streak of light across the sky. People call them shooting stars but they are actually small pieces of matter burning up as they enter Earths atmosphere from space. Meteors are called meteoroids before they reach Earths atmosphere. Meteoroids are smaller than asteroids and range from the size of boulders down to the size of tiny sand grains. Still smaller objects are called interplanetary dust. When Earth passes through a cluster of meteoroids, there is a meteor shower. These clusters are often remnants left behind by comet tails. 	meteoroids are meteors that enter earths atmosphere	false
Although most meteors burn up in the atmosphere, larger meteoroids may strike the Earths surface to create a meteorite. Meteorites are valuable to scientists because they provide clues about our solar system. Many meteorites are from asteroids that formed when the solar system formed (Figure 1.2). A few meteorites are made of rocky material that is thought to have come from Mars when an asteroid impact shot material off the Martian surface and into space. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	meteorites from mars and the moon are the only rocks we have from those bodies	false
Although most meteors burn up in the atmosphere, larger meteoroids may strike the Earths surface to create a meteorite. Meteorites are valuable to scientists because they provide clues about our solar system. Many meteorites are from asteroids that formed when the solar system formed (Figure 1.2). A few meteorites are made of rocky material that is thought to have come from Mars when an asteroid impact shot material off the Martian surface and into space. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	many meteorites were formed in the early solar system	true
Our solar system, including the Sun, Earth, and all the other planets, is within one of the spiral arms in the disk of the Milky Way Galaxy. Most of the stars we see in the sky are relatively nearby stars that are also in this spiral arm. We are about 26,000 light-years from the center of the galaxy, a little more than halfway out from the center of the galaxy to the edge. Just as Earth orbits the Sun, the Sun and solar system orbit the center of the Galaxy. One orbit of the solar system takes about 225 to 250 million years. The solar system has orbited 20 to 25 times since it formed 4.6 billion years ago. Astronomers have recently discovered that at the center of the Milky Way, and most other galaxies, is a supermassive black hole, although a black hole cannot be seen. This video describes the solar system in which we live. It is located in an outer edge of the Milky Way galaxy, which spans 100,000 light years. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  The Universe contains many billions of stars and there are many billions of galaxies. Our home, the Milky Way galaxy, is only one. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the solar system formed 46 billion years ago	true
The Milky Way Galaxy, which is our galaxy. The Milky Way is made of millions of stars along with a lot of gas and dust. It looks different from other galaxies because we are looking at the main disk from within the galaxy. Astronomers estimate that the Milky Way contains 200 to 400 billion stars. 	the milky way galaxy formed 46 billion years ago	false
The Moon is Earths only natural satellite, a body that moves around a larger body in space. The Moon orbits Earth for the same reason Earth orbits the Sun  gravity. The Moon is 3,476 km in diameter, about one-fourth the size of Earth. The satellite is also not as dense as the Earth; gravity on the Moon is only one-sixth as strong as it is on Earth. An astronaut can jump six times as high on the Moon as on Earth! The Moon makes one complete orbit around the Earth every 27.3 days. The Moon also rotates on its axis once every 27.3 days. Do you know what this means? The same side of the Moon always faces Earth, so that side of the Moon is what we always see in the night sky (Figure 1.1). The Moon makes no light of its own, but instead only reflects light from the Sun. (a) The near side of the Moon faces Earth continually. It has a thinner crust with many more maria (flat areas of basaltic rock). (b) The far side of the Moon has only been seen by spacecraft. It has a thicker crust and far fewer maria (flat areas of basaltic rock). 	the moon is earths only natural satellite	true
The Moon has no atmosphere. Since an atmosphere moderates temperature, the Moons average surface temperature during the day is approximately 225 F, but drops to -243 F at night. The coldest temperatures, around -397 F, occur in craters in the permanently shaded south polar basin. These are among the coldest temperatures recorded in the entire solar system. Earths landscape is extremely varied, with mountains, valleys, plains and hills. This landscape is always changing as plate tectonics builds new features and weathering and erosion destroys them. The landscape of the Moon is very different. With no plate tectonics, features are not built. With no atmosphere, features are not destroyed. Still, the Moon has a unique surface. Lunar surface features include the bowl-shaped craters that are caused by meteorite impacts (Figure 1.2). If Earth did not have plate tectonics or erosion, its surface would also be covered with meteorite craters. Even from Earth, the Moon has visible dark areas and light areas. The dark areas are called maria, which means seas because thats what the ancients thought they were. In fact, the maria are not water but solid, flat areas of basaltic lava. From about 3.0 to 3.5 billion years ago the Moon was continually bombarded by meteorites. Some of these meteorites were so large that they broke through the Moons newly formed surface. Then, magma flowed out and filled the craters. Scientists estimate this meteorite-caused volcanic activity on the Moon ceased about 1.2 billion years ago, but most occurred long before that. The lighter parts of the Moon are called terrae or highlands (Figure 1.3). The terrae are higher than the maria and A crater on the surface of the Moon. include several high mountain ranges. The terrae are the light silicate minerals that precipitated out of the ancient magma ocean and formed the early lunar crust. There are no lakes, rivers, or even small puddles anywhere to be found on the Moons surface, but water in the form of ice has been found in the extremely cold craters and bound up in the lunar soil. Despite the possible presence of water, the lack of an atmosphere and the extreme temperatures make it no surprise to scientists that the Moon has absolutely no evidence of life. Life from Earth has visited the Moon and there are footprints of astronauts on the lunar surface. With no wind, rain, or living thing to disturb them, these footprints will remain as long as the Moon exists. Only an impact with a meteorite could destroy them. 	many of the lunar craters are due to volcanic eruptions	false
Like Earth, the Moon has a distinct crust, mantle, and core. What is known about the Moons interior was determined from the analysis of rock samples gathered by astronauts and from unmanned spacecraft sent to the Moon (Figure The Moons small core, 600 to 800 kilometers in diameter, is mostly iron with some sulfur and nickel. The mantle is composed of the minerals olivine and orthopyroxene. Analysis of Moon rocks indicates that there may also be high levels of iron and titanium in the lunar mantle. A close-up of the Moon, showing maria (the dark areas) and terrae (the light areas); maria covers around 16% of the Moons surface, mostly on the side of the Moon we see. LCROSS crashed into the Moon in May 2009. This QUEST video describes the mission. After watching, look up the mission to see what they found! Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the moons interior the same as earths interior the same rock and metal make up the mantle and core in the same proportions	false
Natural gas, often known simply as gas, is composed mostly of the hydrocarbon methane. The amount of natural gas being extracted and used in the Untied States is increasing rapidly. 	fracking has increased rapidly in the united states in recent years	true
Natural gas, often known simply as gas, is composed mostly of the hydrocarbon methane. The amount of natural gas being extracted and used in the Untied States is increasing rapidly. 	natural gas often forms with crude oil but at a lower temperature	false
Natural gas burns much cleaner than other fossil fuels, meaning that it causes less air pollution. Natural gas also produces less carbon dioxide than other fossil fuels do for the same amount of energy, so its global warming effects are less (Figure 1.2). Unfortunately, drilling for natural gas can be environmentally destructive. One technique used is hydraulic fractur- ing, also called fracking, which increases the rate of recovery of natural gas. Fluids are pumped through a borehole to create fractures in the reservoir rock that contains the natural gas. Material is added to the fluid to prevent the fractures from closing. The damage comes primarily from chemicals in the fracturing fluids. Chemicals that have been found in the fluids may be carcinogens (cancer-causing), radioactive materials, or endocrine disruptors, which interrupt hormones in the bodies of humans and animals. The fluids may get into groundwater or may runoff into streams and other surface waters. As noted above, fracking may cause earthquakes. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	earthquake activity has increased in locations where there is a fracking boom	true
Natural gas, often known simply as gas, is composed mostly of the hydrocarbon methane. The amount of natural gas being extracted and used in the Untied States is increasing rapidly. 	fossil fuels burn much cleaner than natural gas	true
So that people in developed nations maintain a good lifestyle and people in developing nations have the ability to improve their lifestyles, natural resources must be conserved and protected (Figure 1.1). People are researching ways to find renewable alternatives to non-renewable resources. Here is a checklist of ways to conserve resources: Buy less stuff (use items as long as you can, and ask yourself if you really need something new). Reduce excess packaging (drink tap water instead of water from plastic bottles). Recycle materials such as metal cans, old cell phones, and plastic bottles. Purchase products made from recycled materials. Reduce pollution so that resources are maintained. Prevent soil erosion. Plant new trees to replace those that are cut down. Drive cars less, take public transportation, bicycle, or walk. Conserve energy at home (turn out lights when they are not needed). Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	if we all recycle there will be enough resources for people in developing nations to have the same lifestyle as people in developed nations	false
So that people in developed nations maintain a good lifestyle and people in developing nations have the ability to improve their lifestyles, natural resources must be conserved and protected (Figure 1.1). People are researching ways to find renewable alternatives to non-renewable resources. Here is a checklist of ways to conserve resources: Buy less stuff (use items as long as you can, and ask yourself if you really need something new). Reduce excess packaging (drink tap water instead of water from plastic bottles). Recycle materials such as metal cans, old cell phones, and plastic bottles. Purchase products made from recycled materials. Reduce pollution so that resources are maintained. Prevent soil erosion. Plant new trees to replace those that are cut down. Drive cars less, take public transportation, bicycle, or walk. Conserve energy at home (turn out lights when they are not needed). Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	soil is a resource that must be protected	true
So that people in developed nations maintain a good lifestyle and people in developing nations have the ability to improve their lifestyles, natural resources must be conserved and protected (Figure 1.1). People are researching ways to find renewable alternatives to non-renewable resources. Here is a checklist of ways to conserve resources: Buy less stuff (use items as long as you can, and ask yourself if you really need something new). Reduce excess packaging (drink tap water instead of water from plastic bottles). Recycle materials such as metal cans, old cell phones, and plastic bottles. Purchase products made from recycled materials. Reduce pollution so that resources are maintained. Prevent soil erosion. Plant new trees to replace those that are cut down. Drive cars less, take public transportation, bicycle, or walk. Conserve energy at home (turn out lights when they are not needed). Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	individuals cant really make a difference in natural resource use	false
So that people in developed nations maintain a good lifestyle and people in developing nations have the ability to improve their lifestyles, natural resources must be conserved and protected (Figure 1.1). People are researching ways to find renewable alternatives to non-renewable resources. Here is a checklist of ways to conserve resources: Buy less stuff (use items as long as you can, and ask yourself if you really need something new). Reduce excess packaging (drink tap water instead of water from plastic bottles). Recycle materials such as metal cans, old cell phones, and plastic bottles. Purchase products made from recycled materials. Reduce pollution so that resources are maintained. Prevent soil erosion. Plant new trees to replace those that are cut down. Drive cars less, take public transportation, bicycle, or walk. Conserve energy at home (turn out lights when they are not needed). Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	trees a renewable resource but forests are much less renewable	true
Neptunes blue color is mostly because of frozen methane (CH4 ). When Voyager 2 visited Neptune in 1986, there was a large dark-blue spot, which scientists named the Great Dark Spot, south of the equator. When the Hubble Space Telescope took pictures of Neptune in 1994, the Great Dark Spot had disappeared, but another dark spot had appeared north of the equator. Astronomers think that both of these spots represent gaps in the methane clouds on Neptune. The changing appearance of Neptune is caused by its turbulent atmosphere. The winds on Neptune are stronger than on any other planet in the solar system, reaching speeds of 1,100 km/h (700 mi/h), close to the speed of sound. This extreme weather surprised astronomers, since the planet receives little energy from the Sun to power weather systems. Neptunes core is 7000 C (12,632 C) which means that it produces more energy than it receives from the Sun. Neptune is also one of the coldest places in the solar system. Temperatures at the top of the clouds are about -218 C (-360 F). Neptunes composition is that of a gas giant: (1) upper atmosphere, (2) atmo- sphere composed of hydrogen, helium and methane gas, (3) mantle of water, ammonia and methane ice, (4) core of rock and ice. 	dark spots on neptune are storms that come and go	false
Neptunes blue color is mostly because of frozen methane (CH4 ). When Voyager 2 visited Neptune in 1986, there was a large dark-blue spot, which scientists named the Great Dark Spot, south of the equator. When the Hubble Space Telescope took pictures of Neptune in 1994, the Great Dark Spot had disappeared, but another dark spot had appeared north of the equator. Astronomers think that both of these spots represent gaps in the methane clouds on Neptune. The changing appearance of Neptune is caused by its turbulent atmosphere. The winds on Neptune are stronger than on any other planet in the solar system, reaching speeds of 1,100 km/h (700 mi/h), close to the speed of sound. This extreme weather surprised astronomers, since the planet receives little energy from the Sun to power weather systems. Neptunes core is 7000 C (12,632 C) which means that it produces more energy than it receives from the Sun. Neptune is also one of the coldest places in the solar system. Temperatures at the top of the clouds are about -218 C (-360 F). Neptunes composition is that of a gas giant: (1) upper atmosphere, (2) atmo- sphere composed of hydrogen, helium and methane gas, (3) mantle of water, ammonia and methane ice, (4) core of rock and ice. 	neptune produces more energy than it receives from the sun	true
Neptunes blue color is mostly because of frozen methane (CH4 ). When Voyager 2 visited Neptune in 1986, there was a large dark-blue spot, which scientists named the Great Dark Spot, south of the equator. When the Hubble Space Telescope took pictures of Neptune in 1994, the Great Dark Spot had disappeared, but another dark spot had appeared north of the equator. Astronomers think that both of these spots represent gaps in the methane clouds on Neptune. The changing appearance of Neptune is caused by its turbulent atmosphere. The winds on Neptune are stronger than on any other planet in the solar system, reaching speeds of 1,100 km/h (700 mi/h), close to the speed of sound. This extreme weather surprised astronomers, since the planet receives little energy from the Sun to power weather systems. Neptunes core is 7000 C (12,632 C) which means that it produces more energy than it receives from the Sun. Neptune is also one of the coldest places in the solar system. Temperatures at the top of the clouds are about -218 C (-360 F). Neptunes composition is that of a gas giant: (1) upper atmosphere, (2) atmo- sphere composed of hydrogen, helium and methane gas, (3) mantle of water, ammonia and methane ice, (4) core of rock and ice. 	neptunes mantle is made of water ammonia and methane ice	true
Although nitrogen is the most abundant gas in the atmosphere, it is not in a form that plants can use. To be useful, nitrogen must be fixed, or converted into a more useful form. Although some nitrogen is fixed by lightning or blue-green algae, much is modified by bacteria in the soil. These bacteria combine the nitrogen with oxygen or hydrogen to create nitrates or ammonia (Figure 1.2). (a) Nucleic acids contain nitrogen (b) Chlorophyll molecules contain nitrogen 	nitrogen gas found in the atmosphere is useful to organisms	false
Although nitrogen is the most abundant gas in the atmosphere, it is not in a form that plants can use. To be useful, nitrogen must be fixed, or converted into a more useful form. Although some nitrogen is fixed by lightning or blue-green algae, much is modified by bacteria in the soil. These bacteria combine the nitrogen with oxygen or hydrogen to create nitrates or ammonia (Figure 1.2). (a) Nucleic acids contain nitrogen (b) Chlorophyll molecules contain nitrogen 	nitrogen can be recycled in plants and soil and does not need to return to the atmosphere as a gas	true
Although nitrogen is the most abundant gas in the atmosphere, it is not in a form that plants can use. To be useful, nitrogen must be fixed, or converted into a more useful form. Although some nitrogen is fixed by lightning or blue-green algae, much is modified by bacteria in the soil. These bacteria combine the nitrogen with oxygen or hydrogen to create nitrates or ammonia (Figure 1.2). (a) Nucleic acids contain nitrogen (b) Chlorophyll molecules contain nitrogen 	modern fertilizers supply fixed nitrogen to the soil eliminating the need for nitrogenfixing bacteria	true
Nonrenewable resources are natural resources that are limited in supply and cannot be replaced as quickly as they are used up. A natural resource is anything people can use that comes from nature. Energy resources are some of the most important natural resources because everything we do requires energy. Nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels such as oil and the radioactive element uranium. 	most renewable resources produce little if any pollution	true
Nonrenewable resources are natural resources that are limited in supply and cannot be replaced as quickly as they are used up. A natural resource is anything people can use that comes from nature. Energy resources are some of the most important natural resources because everything we do requires energy. Nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels such as oil and the radioactive element uranium. 	renewable energy resources are used more commonly than nonrenewable energy resources	false
Nonrenewable resources are natural resources that are limited in supply and cannot be replaced as quickly as they are used up. A natural resource is anything people can use that comes from nature. Energy resources are some of the most important natural resources because everything we do requires energy. Nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels such as oil and the radioactive element uranium. 	people have been using wind and water for energy only for the past century	false
Nuclear power plants, such as the one seen in Figure 1.2, use uranium, which is mined, processed, and then concentrated into fuel rods. When the uranium atoms in the fuel rods are hit by other extremely tiny particles, they split apart. The number of tiny particles allowed to hit the fuel rods needs to be controlled, or they would cause a dangerous explosion. The energy from a nuclear power plant heats water, which creates steam and causes a turbine to spin. The spinning turbine turns a generator, which in turn produces electricity. Many countries around the world use nuclear energy as a source of electricity. In the United States, a little less than 20% of electricity comes from nuclear energy. 	the number of tiny particles allowed to hit the uranium fuel rods must be unpredictable and spontaneous	false
When the nucleus of an atom is split, it releases a huge amount of energy called nuclear energy. For nuclear energy to be used as a power source, scientists and engineers have learned to split nuclei and to control the release of energy (Figure 1.1). 	nuclear energy is a source of electricity	true
When the nucleus of an atom is split, it releases a huge amount of energy called nuclear energy. For nuclear energy to be used as a power source, scientists and engineers have learned to split nuclei and to control the release of energy (Figure 1.1). 	uranium mining is an important part of generating nuclear power	true
When the nucleus of an atom is split, it releases a huge amount of energy called nuclear energy. For nuclear energy to be used as a power source, scientists and engineers have learned to split nuclei and to control the release of energy (Figure 1.1). 	the only major accident so far at a nuclear power plant was caused by an enormous earthquake and tsunami in japan	false
Net energy is the amount of useable energy available from a resource after subtracting the amount of energy needed to make the energy from that resource available. For example, every 5 barrels of oil that are made available for use require 1 barrel for extracting and refining the petroleum. What is the net energy from this process? About 4 barrels (5 barrels minus 1 barrel). What happens if the energy needed to extract and refine oil increases? Why might that happen? The energy cost of an energy resource increases when the easy deposits of that resource have already been consumed. For example, if all the nearshore petroleum in a region has been extracted, more costly drilling must take place further offshore (Figure 1.1). If the energy cost of obtaining energy increases, the resource will be used even faster. Offshore drilling is taking place in deeper water than before. It takes a lot of energy to build a deep drilling platform and to run it. 	incandescent light bulbs are more efficient than compact fluorescent light bulbs	false
Net energy is the amount of useable energy available from a resource after subtracting the amount of energy needed to make the energy from that resource available. For example, every 5 barrels of oil that are made available for use require 1 barrel for extracting and refining the petroleum. What is the net energy from this process? About 4 barrels (5 barrels minus 1 barrel). What happens if the energy needed to extract and refine oil increases? Why might that happen? The energy cost of an energy resource increases when the easy deposits of that resource have already been consumed. For example, if all the nearshore petroleum in a region has been extracted, more costly drilling must take place further offshore (Figure 1.1). If the energy cost of obtaining energy increases, the resource will be used even faster. Offshore drilling is taking place in deeper water than before. It takes a lot of energy to build a deep drilling platform and to run it. 	the net energy obtained from a resource decreases when the easy deposits of that resource have been consumed	true
Net energy is the amount of useable energy available from a resource after subtracting the amount of energy needed to make the energy from that resource available. For example, every 5 barrels of oil that are made available for use require 1 barrel for extracting and refining the petroleum. What is the net energy from this process? About 4 barrels (5 barrels minus 1 barrel). What happens if the energy needed to extract and refine oil increases? Why might that happen? The energy cost of an energy resource increases when the easy deposits of that resource have already been consumed. For example, if all the nearshore petroleum in a region has been extracted, more costly drilling must take place further offshore (Figure 1.1). If the energy cost of obtaining energy increases, the resource will be used even faster. Offshore drilling is taking place in deeper water than before. It takes a lot of energy to build a deep drilling platform and to run it. 	the netenergy ratio is the amount of energy in a resource with the amount of energy needed to obtain it subtracted	true
The net-energy ratio demonstrates the difference between the amount of energy available in a resource and the amount of energy used to get it. If it takes 8 units of energy to make available 10 units of energy, then the net-energy ratio is 10/8 or 1.25. What does a net-energy ratio larger than 1 mean? What if the net-energy ratio is less than 1? A net-energy ratio larger than 1 means that there is a net gain in usable energy; a net-energy ratio smaller than one means there is an overall energy loss. Table 1.1 shows the net-energy ratios for some common energy sources. Energy Source Solar Energy Natural Gas Petroleum Coal-fired Electricity Net-energy Ratio 5.8 4.9 4.5 2.5-5.1 Notice from the table that solar energy yields much more net energy than other sources. This is because it takes very little energy to get usable solar energy. Sunshine is abundant and does not need to be found, extracted, or transported very far. The range for coal-fired electricity is because of the differing costs of transporting the coal. What does this suggest about using coal to generate electricity? The efficiency is greater in areas where the coal is locally mined and does not have to be transported great distances (Figure 1.2). Obtaining coal for energy takes a lot of energy. The coal must be located, extracted, refined, and transported. Because so much of the energy we use is from fossil fuels, we need to be especially concerned about using them efficiently. Sometimes our choices affect energy efficiency. For example, transportation by cars and airplanes is less energy-efficient than transportation by boats and trains. 	as a society we should make choices to use energy that is more efficient	true
Hydrothermal vents are among the most unusual ecosystems on Earth since they are dependent on chemosynthetic organisms at the base of the food web. At mid-ocean ridges at hydrothermal vents, bacteria that use chemosyn- thesis for food energy are the base of a unique ecosystem (Figure 1.5). This ecosystem is entirely separate from the photosynthesis at the surface. Shrimp, clams, fish, and giant tube worms have been found in these extreme places. Giant tube worms found at hydrothermal vents get food from the chemosynthetic bacteria that live within them. The bacte- ria provide food; the worms provide shel- ter. A video explaining hydrothermal vents with good footage is seen here: 	bacteria that can make food using chemicals are called chemosythetic bacteria	true
Corals and other animals deposit calcium carbonate to create rock reefs near the shore. Coral reefs are the rain- forests of the oceans, with a tremendous amount of species diversity (Figure 1.2). Reefs can form interesting shapes in the oceans. Remember that hot spots create volcanoes on the seafloor. If these volcanoes rise above sea level to become islands, and if they occur in tropical waters, coral reefs will form on them. Since the volcanoes are cones, the reef forms in a circle around the volcano. As the volcano comes off the hot spot, the crust cools. The volcano subsides and then begins to erode away (Figure 1.3). Eventually, all that is left is a reef island called an atoll. A lagoon is found inside the reef. 	coral reefs rival rainforests in species productivity and biomass	true
Conditions in the intertidal zone change rapidly as water covers and uncovers the region and waves pound on the rocks. A great abundance of life is found in the intertidal zone (Figure 1.1). High energy waves hit the organisms that live in this zone, so they must be adapted to pounding waves and exposure to air during low tides. Hard shells protect from waves and also protect against drying out when the animal is above water. Strong attachments keep the animals anchored to the rock. In a tide pool, as in the photo, what organisms are found where and what specific adaptations do they have to that zone? The mussels on the top left have hard shells for protection and to prevent drying because they are often not covered by water. The sea anemones in the lower right are more often submerged and have strong attachments but can close during low tides. Many young organisms get their start in estuaries and so they must be adapted to rapid shifts in salinity. Organisms in a tide pool include sea stars and sea urchins. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the sea anemones are well adapted to their environments because they have strong attachments and can close during high tides	false
Conditions in the intertidal zone change rapidly as water covers and uncovers the region and waves pound on the rocks. A great abundance of life is found in the intertidal zone (Figure 1.1). High energy waves hit the organisms that live in this zone, so they must be adapted to pounding waves and exposure to air during low tides. Hard shells protect from waves and also protect against drying out when the animal is above water. Strong attachments keep the animals anchored to the rock. In a tide pool, as in the photo, what organisms are found where and what specific adaptations do they have to that zone? The mussels on the top left have hard shells for protection and to prevent drying because they are often not covered by water. The sea anemones in the lower right are more often submerged and have strong attachments but can close during low tides. Many young organisms get their start in estuaries and so they must be adapted to rapid shifts in salinity. Organisms in a tide pool include sea stars and sea urchins. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the most difficult environmental condition for an animal that lives in a tide pool is tolerating rapid shifts in salinity	true
Trash from the lands all around the North Pacific is caught up in currents. The currents bring the trash into the center of the North Pacific Gyre. Scientists estimate that it takes about six years for trash to move from west coast of North America to the center of the gyre. The concentration of trash increases toward the center of the gyre. While recognizable pieces of garbage are visible, much of the trash is tiny plastic polymers that are invisible but can be detected in water samples. The particles are at or just below the surface within the gyre. Plastic confetti-like pieces are visible beneath the surface at the gyres center. This albatross likely died from the plastic it had ingested. The size of the garbage patch is unknown, since it cant be seen from above. Some people estimate that its twice the size of continental U.S, with a mass of 100 million tons. 	it takes about 100 years for trash to move from north america to the center of the north pacific gyre	false
Trash from the lands all around the North Pacific is caught up in currents. The currents bring the trash into the center of the North Pacific Gyre. Scientists estimate that it takes about six years for trash to move from west coast of North America to the center of the gyre. The concentration of trash increases toward the center of the gyre. While recognizable pieces of garbage are visible, much of the trash is tiny plastic polymers that are invisible but can be detected in water samples. The particles are at or just below the surface within the gyre. Plastic confetti-like pieces are visible beneath the surface at the gyres center. This albatross likely died from the plastic it had ingested. The size of the garbage patch is unknown, since it cant be seen from above. Some people estimate that its twice the size of continental U.S, with a mass of 100 million tons. 	the north pacific gyre is estimated to have a mass of 100 million tons	true
Trash from the lands all around the North Pacific is caught up in currents. The currents bring the trash into the center of the North Pacific Gyre. Scientists estimate that it takes about six years for trash to move from west coast of North America to the center of the gyre. The concentration of trash increases toward the center of the gyre. While recognizable pieces of garbage are visible, much of the trash is tiny plastic polymers that are invisible but can be detected in water samples. The particles are at or just below the surface within the gyre. Plastic confetti-like pieces are visible beneath the surface at the gyres center. This albatross likely died from the plastic it had ingested. The size of the garbage patch is unknown, since it cant be seen from above. Some people estimate that its twice the size of continental U.S, with a mass of 100 million tons. 	in the gyre plastic is present as particles confettilike pieces and as intact trash	true
To better understand regions of the ocean, scientists define the water column by depth. They divide the entire ocean into two zones vertically, based on light level. Large lakes are divided into similar regions. Sunlight only penetrates the sea surface to a depth of about 200 m, creating the photic zone ("photic" means light). Organisms that photosynthesize depend on sunlight for food and so are restricted to the photic zone. Since tiny photosynthetic organisms, known as phytoplankton, supply nearly all of the energy and nutrients to the rest of the marine food web, most other marine organisms live in or at least visit the photic zone. In the aphotic zone there is not enough light for photosynthesis. The aphotic zone makes up the majority of the ocean, but has a relatively small amount of its life, both in diversity of type and in numbers. The aphotic zone is subdivided based on depth (Figure 1.1). The average depth of the ocean is 3,790 m, a lot more shallow than the deep trenches but still an incredible depth for sea creatures to live in. What makes it so hard to live at the bottom of the ocean? The three major factors that make the deep ocean hard to inhabit are the absence of light, low temperature, and extremely high pressure. 	the photic zone is around 200 meters in all oceans	false
There is still oil on beaches and in sediment on the seafloor in the region. Chemicals from the oil dispersants are still in the water. In October 2011 a report was issued that showed that whales and dolphins are dying in the Gulf at twice their normal rate. The long-term effects will be with us for a long time. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	when we no longer hear about an oil spill in the news it is because the region has been cleaned up and is back to normal	false
Large oil spills, like the Exxon Valdez in Alaska in 1989, get a lot of attention, as they should. Besides these large spills, though, much more oil enters the oceans from small leaks that are only a problem locally. In this concept, well take a look at a large recent oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico. 	more oil enters the oceans from small leaks than from large spills	true
The addition of more people has not just resulted in more poor people. A large percentage of people expect much more than to have their basic needs met. For about one-quarter of people there is an abundance of food, plenty of water, and a secure home. Comfortable temperatures are made possible by heating and cooling systems, rapid trans- portation is available by motor vehicles or a well-developed public transportation system, instant communication takes place by phones and email, and many other luxuries are available that were not even dreamed of only a few The percentage of people in the world that live in abject poverty is decreasing some- what globally, but increasing in some re- gions, such as Sub-Saharan Africa. decades ago. All of these require resources in order to be produced, and fossil fuels in order to be powered (Figure Many people refer to the abundance of luxury items in these peoples lives as over-consumption. People in developed nations use 32 times more resources than people in the developing countries of the world. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	overall the percentage of people in the world that live in abject poverty is decreasing	true
The increased numbers of people have other impacts on the planet. Humans do not just need food. They also need clean water, secure shelter, and a safe place for their wastes. These needs are met to different degrees in different nations and among different socioeconomic classes of people. For example, about 1.2 billion of the worlds people do not have enough clean water for drinking and washing each day (Figure 1.2). 	about 1 million of the worlds people do not have enough clean water for drinking	false
The Green Revolution has brought enormous impacts to the planet. 	global resources are distributed equally across the planet	false
The increased numbers of people have other impacts on the planet. Humans do not just need food. They also need clean water, secure shelter, and a safe place for their wastes. These needs are met to different degrees in different nations and among different socioeconomic classes of people. For example, about 1.2 billion of the worlds people do not have enough clean water for drinking and washing each day (Figure 1.2). 	basic human necessities are food clean water secure shelter and basic sanitation	true
At this point you might be asking yourself, Is ozone bad or is ozone good? There is no simple answer to that question: It depends on where the ozone is located (Figure 1.1). In the troposphere, ozone is a pollutant. In the ozone layer in the stratosphere, ozone screens out high energy ultraviolet radiation and makes Earth habitable. 	in the troposphere ozone is a pollutant	true
At this point you might be asking yourself, Is ozone bad or is ozone good? There is no simple answer to that question: It depends on where the ozone is located (Figure 1.1). In the troposphere, ozone is a pollutant. In the ozone layer in the stratosphere, ozone screens out high energy ultraviolet radiation and makes Earth habitable. 	once released into the air cfcs float up to the stratosphere	true
Ozone losses on human health and environment include: Increases in sunburns, cataracts (clouding of the lens of the eye), and skin cancers. A loss of ozone of only 1% is estimated to increase skin cancer cases by 5% to 6%. Decreases in the human immune systems ability to fight off infectious diseases. Reduction in crop yields because many plants are sensitive to ultraviolet light. Decreases in phytoplankton productivity. A decrease of 6% to 12% has been measured around Antarctica, which may be at least partly related to the ozone hole. The effects of excess UV on other organisms is not known. Whales in the Gulf of California have been found to have sunburned cells in their lowest skin layers, indicating very severe sunburns. The problem is greatest with light colored species or species that spend more time near the sea surface. When the problem with ozone depletion was recognized, world leaders took action. CFCs were banned in spray cans in some nations in 1978. The greatest production of CFCs was in 1986, but it has declined since then. This will be discussed more in the next concept. 	cfcs were completely banned in 1978 and the ozone hole has since declined	false
Geologists know about marine transgressions and regressions from the sedimentary rock record. These events leave characteristic rock layers known as sedimentary facies. On a shoreline, sand and other coarse grained rock fragments are commonly found on the beach where the wave energy is high. Away from the shore in lower energy environments, fine-grained silt that later creates shale is deposited. In deeper, low-energy waters, carbonate mud that later hardens into limestone is deposited. 	shale is the rock that forms from halite and sand deposits	false
Geologists know about marine transgressions and regressions from the sedimentary rock record. These events leave characteristic rock layers known as sedimentary facies. On a shoreline, sand and other coarse grained rock fragments are commonly found on the beach where the wave energy is high. Away from the shore in lower energy environments, fine-grained silt that later creates shale is deposited. In deeper, low-energy waters, carbonate mud that later hardens into limestone is deposited. 	geologists think that the paleozoic marine transgressions and regressions were caused by decreasing and increasing glaciers	true
The Paleozoic sedimentary rocks of the Grand Canyon contain evidence of marine transgressions and regressions, but even there the rock record is not complete. Look at the sequence in the Figure 1.2 and see if you can determine whether the sea was transgressing or regressing. At the bottom, the Tonto Group represents a marine transgression: sandstone (11), shale (10), and limestone (9) laid down during 30 million years of the Cambrian Period. The Ordovician and Silurian are unknown because of an unconformity. Above that is freshwater limestone (8), which is overlain by limestone (7) and then shale (6), indicating that the sea was regressing. After another unconformity, the rocks of the Supai Group (5) include limestone, siltstone, and sandstone indicative of a regressing sea. Above those rocks are shale (4), sandstone (3), a limestone and sandstone mix (2) showing that the sea regressed and transgressed and finally limestone (1) indicating that the sea had come back in. 	much of what geologists know about paleozoic marine transgressions and regressions is from what is displayed at the grand canyon	true
Pangaea was the last supercontinent on Earth. Evidence for the existence of Pangaea was what Alfred Wegener used to create his continental drift hypothesis, which was described in the chapter Plate Tectonics. As the continents move and the land masses change shape, the shape of the oceans changes too. During the time of Pangaea, about 250 million years ago, most of Earths water was collected in a huge ocean called Panthalassa (Figure 1.2). Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the continents move around on earths surface but they are always centered near the equator	true
A mountain-building event is called an orogeny. Orogenies take place over tens or hundreds of millions of years. As continents smash into microcontinents and island arcs collided, mountains rise. Geologists find evidence for the orogenies that took place while Pangaea was forming in many locations. For example, Laurentia collided with the Taconic Island Arc during the Taconic Orogeny (Figure 1.1). The remnants of this mountain range make up the Taconic Mountains in New York. The Taconic Orogeny is an example of a collision between a continent and a volcanic island arc. Laurentia experienced other orogenies as it merged with the northern continents. The southern continents came together to form Gondwana. When Laurentia and Gondwana collided to create Pangaea, the Appalachians rose. Geologists think they may once have been higher than the Himalayas are now. 	the southern continents came together to form pangaea	false
Pangaea was the last supercontinent on Earth. Evidence for the existence of Pangaea was what Alfred Wegener used to create his continental drift hypothesis, which was described in the chapter Plate Tectonics. As the continents move and the land masses change shape, the shape of the oceans changes too. During the time of Pangaea, about 250 million years ago, most of Earths water was collected in a huge ocean called Panthalassa (Figure 1.2). Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	pangaea was central to alfred wegeners continental drift hypothesis	true
A mountain-building event is called an orogeny. Orogenies take place over tens or hundreds of millions of years. As continents smash into microcontinents and island arcs collided, mountains rise. Geologists find evidence for the orogenies that took place while Pangaea was forming in many locations. For example, Laurentia collided with the Taconic Island Arc during the Taconic Orogeny (Figure 1.1). The remnants of this mountain range make up the Taconic Mountains in New York. The Taconic Orogeny is an example of a collision between a continent and a volcanic island arc. Laurentia experienced other orogenies as it merged with the northern continents. The southern continents came together to form Gondwana. When Laurentia and Gondwana collided to create Pangaea, the Appalachians rose. Geologists think they may once have been higher than the Himalayas are now. 	geologists think that the himalayas are the tallest mountains in earth history	false
Most of the compounds that come out of the refining process are fuels, such as gasoline, diesel, and heating oil. Because these fuels are rich sources of energy and can be easily transported, oil provides about 90% of the energy used for transportation around the world. The rest of the compounds from crude oil are used for waxes, plastics, fertilizers, and other products. Gasoline is in a convenient form for use in cars and other transportation vehicles. In a car engine, the burned gasoline mostly turns into carbon dioxide and water vapor. The fuel releases most of its energy as heat, which causes the gases to expand. This creates enough force to move the pistons inside the engine and to power the car. Refineries like this one separate crude oil into many useful fuels and other chemi- cals. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	in a car engine gasoline burns to become gases which expand when heated and move pistons to power the car	true
Oil is a liquid fossil fuel that is extremely useful because it can be transported easily and can be used in cars and other vehicles. Oil is currently the single largest source of energy in the world. 	the united states produces about onehalf as much oil as it uses	false
Figure 1.1 shows the relative sizes of the orbits of the planets, asteroid belt, and Kuiper belt. In general, the farther away from the Sun, the greater the distance from one planets orbit to the next. The orbits of the planets are not circular but slightly elliptical, with the Sun located at one of the foci (see opening image). While studying the solar system, Johannes Kepler discovered the relationship between the time it takes a planet to make one complete orbit around the Sun, its "orbital period," and the distance from the Sun to the planet. If the orbital period of a planet is known, then it is possible to determine the planets distance from the Sun. This is how astronomers without modern telescopes could determine the distances to other planets within the solar system. How old are you on Earth? How old would you be if you lived on Jupiter? How many days is it until your birthday on Earth? How many days until your birthday if you lived on Saturn? Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  The relative sizes of the orbits of planets in the solar system. The inner solar sys- tem and asteroid belt is on the upper left. The upper right shows the outer planets and the Kuiper belt. 	the closer two adjacent planets are from the sun the farther the distance from one planets orbit to the other	false
Figure 1.1 shows the relative sizes of the orbits of the planets, asteroid belt, and Kuiper belt. In general, the farther away from the Sun, the greater the distance from one planets orbit to the next. The orbits of the planets are not circular but slightly elliptical, with the Sun located at one of the foci (see opening image). While studying the solar system, Johannes Kepler discovered the relationship between the time it takes a planet to make one complete orbit around the Sun, its "orbital period," and the distance from the Sun to the planet. If the orbital period of a planet is known, then it is possible to determine the planets distance from the Sun. This is how astronomers without modern telescopes could determine the distances to other planets within the solar system. How old are you on Earth? How old would you be if you lived on Jupiter? How many days is it until your birthday on Earth? How many days until your birthday if you lived on Saturn? Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  The relative sizes of the orbits of planets in the solar system. The inner solar sys- tem and asteroid belt is on the upper left. The upper right shows the outer planets and the Kuiper belt. 	mars has the smallest orbit in our solar system	false
Figure 1.1 shows the relative sizes of the orbits of the planets, asteroid belt, and Kuiper belt. In general, the farther away from the Sun, the greater the distance from one planets orbit to the next. The orbits of the planets are not circular but slightly elliptical, with the Sun located at one of the foci (see opening image). While studying the solar system, Johannes Kepler discovered the relationship between the time it takes a planet to make one complete orbit around the Sun, its "orbital period," and the distance from the Sun to the planet. If the orbital period of a planet is known, then it is possible to determine the planets distance from the Sun. This is how astronomers without modern telescopes could determine the distances to other planets within the solar system. How old are you on Earth? How old would you be if you lived on Jupiter? How many days is it until your birthday on Earth? How many days until your birthday if you lived on Saturn? Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  The relative sizes of the orbits of planets in the solar system. The inner solar sys- tem and asteroid belt is on the upper left. The upper right shows the outer planets and the Kuiper belt. 	if the asteroid belt is a planet that didnt come together we would expect the asteroids to be the right orbital distance between mars and jupiter	true
Figure 1.1 shows the relative sizes of the orbits of the planets, asteroid belt, and Kuiper belt. In general, the farther away from the Sun, the greater the distance from one planets orbit to the next. The orbits of the planets are not circular but slightly elliptical, with the Sun located at one of the foci (see opening image). While studying the solar system, Johannes Kepler discovered the relationship between the time it takes a planet to make one complete orbit around the Sun, its "orbital period," and the distance from the Sun to the planet. If the orbital period of a planet is known, then it is possible to determine the planets distance from the Sun. This is how astronomers without modern telescopes could determine the distances to other planets within the solar system. How old are you on Earth? How old would you be if you lived on Jupiter? How many days is it until your birthday on Earth? How many days until your birthday if you lived on Saturn? Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  The relative sizes of the orbits of planets in the solar system. The inner solar sys- tem and asteroid belt is on the upper left. The upper right shows the outer planets and the Kuiper belt. 	scientists now must know exactly where a planet is and will be in the future if they are going to send spacecraft to see it	true
Since the time of Copernicus, Kepler, and Galileo, we have learned a lot more about our solar system. Astronomers have discovered two more planets (Uranus and Neptune), five dwarf planets (Ceres, Pluto, Makemake, Haumea, and Eris), more than 150 moons, and many, many asteroids and other small objects. Although the Sun is just an average star compared to other stars, it is by far the largest object in the solar system. The Sun is more than 500 times the mass of everything else in the solar system combined! Table 1.1 gives data on the sizes of the Sun and planets relative to Earth. Object Mass (Relative to Earth) Sun Mercury Venus Earth 333,000 Earths mass 0.06 Earths mass 0.82 Earths mass 1.00 Earths mass Diameter of Planet (Relative to Earth) 109.2 Earths diameter 0.39 Earths diameter 0.95 Earths diameter 1.00 Earths diameter Object Mass (Relative to Earth) Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune 0.11 Earths mass 317.8 Earths mass 95.2 Earths mass 14.6 Earths mass 17.2 Earths mass Diameter of Planet (Relative to Earth) 0.53 Earths diameter 11.21 Earths diameter 9.41 Earths diameter 3.98 Earths diameter 3.81 Earths diameter 	through his telescope galileo could see all the planets of the solar system	false
Distances in the solar system are often measured in astronomical units (AU). One astronomical unit is defined as the distance from Earth to the Sun. 1 AU equals about 150 million km, or 93 million miles. Table 1.2 shows the distances to the planets (the average radius of orbits) in AU. The table also shows how long it takes each planet to spin on its axis (the length of a day) and how long it takes each planet to complete an orbit (the length of a year); in particular, notice how slowly Venus rotates relative to Earth. Planet Mercury Venus Earth Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Average Distance from Sun (AU) 0.39 AU 0.72 1.00 1.52 5.20 9.54 19.22 30.06 Length of Day (In Earth Days) 56.84 days 243.02 1.00 1.03 0.41 0.43 0.72 0.67 Length of Year (In Earth Years) 0.24 years 0.62 1.00 1.88 11.86 29.46 84.01 164.8 Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	one astronomical unit is 93 million miles	true
Lakes are larger bodies of water. Lakes are usually fresh water, although the Great Salt Lake in Utah is just one exception. Water usually drains out of a lake through a river or a stream and all lakes lose water to evaporation. Lakes form in a variety of different ways: in depressions carved by glaciers, in calderas (Figure 1.1), and along tectonic faults, to name a few. Subglacial lakes are even found below a frozen ice cap. As a result of geologic history and the arrangement of land masses, most lakes are in the Northern Hemisphere. In fact, more than 60% of all the worlds lakes are in Canada  most of these lakes were formed by the glaciers that covered most of Canada in the last Ice Age (Figure 1.2). Lakes are not permanent features of a landscape. Some come and go with the seasons, as water levels rise and fall. Over a longer time, lakes disappear when they fill with sediments, if the springs or streams that fill them diminish, (a) Crater Lake in Oregon is in a volcanic caldera. Lakes can also form in volcanic craters and impact craters. (b) The Great Lakes fill depressions eroded as glaciers scraped rock out from the landscape. (c) Lake Baikal, ice coated in winter in this image, formed as water filled up a tectonic faults. Lakes near Yellowknife were carved by glaciers during the last Ice Age. or if their outlets grow because of erosion. When the climate of an area changes, lakes can either expand or shrink (Figure 1.3). Lakes may disappear if precipitation significantly diminishes. Large lakes have tidal systems and currents, and can even affect weather patterns. The Great Lakes in the United States contain 22% of the worlds fresh surface water (Figure 1.1). The largest them, Lake Superior, has a tide that rises and falls several centimeters each day. The Great Lakes are large enough to alter the weather system in Northeastern United States by the lake effect, which is an increase in snow downwind of the relatively warm lakes. The Great Lakes are home to countless species of fish and wildlife. Many lakes are not natural, but are human-made. People dam a stream in a suitable spot and then let the water back up behind it, creating a lake. These lakes are called "reservoirs." Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	every lake you see was formed naturally	false
Ponds are small bodies of fresh water that usually have no outlet; ponds are often are fed by underground springs. Like lakes, ponds are bordered by hills or low rises so the water is blocked from flowing directly downhill. 	lakes formed in canada were from glaciers that covered north america in the last ice age	true
Ponds are small bodies of fresh water that usually have no outlet; ponds are often are fed by underground springs. Like lakes, ponds are bordered by hills or low rises so the water is blocked from flowing directly downhill. 	lakes are not like the ocean because they are made of fresh water and they do not have tides or currents	false
When the number of births equals the number of deaths, the population is at its carrying capacity for that habitat. In a population at its carrying capacity, there are as many organisms of that species as the habitat can support. The carrying capacity depends on biotic and abiotic factors. If these factors improve, the carrying capacity increases. If the factors become less plentiful, the carrying capacity drops. If resources are being used faster than they are being replenished, then the species has exceeded its carrying capacity. If this occurs, the population will then decrease in size. 	besides changes in births and deaths immigration in or out of a region can also change a population	true
When the number of births equals the number of deaths, the population is at its carrying capacity for that habitat. In a population at its carrying capacity, there are as many organisms of that species as the habitat can support. The carrying capacity depends on biotic and abiotic factors. If these factors improve, the carrying capacity increases. If the factors become less plentiful, the carrying capacity drops. If resources are being used faster than they are being replenished, then the species has exceeded its carrying capacity. If this occurs, the population will then decrease in size. 	for a given species in a given habitat the limiting factor is always the same thing	false
When the number of births equals the number of deaths, the population is at its carrying capacity for that habitat. In a population at its carrying capacity, there are as many organisms of that species as the habitat can support. The carrying capacity depends on biotic and abiotic factors. If these factors improve, the carrying capacity increases. If the factors become less plentiful, the carrying capacity drops. If resources are being used faster than they are being replenished, then the species has exceeded its carrying capacity. If this occurs, the population will then decrease in size. 	a limiting factor determines the carrying capacity for a species	true
In most places the cratons were covered by younger rocks, which together are called a platform. Sometimes the younger rocks eroded away to expose the Precambrian craton (Figure 1.3). 	the presence of zircons in ancient rocks indicates that there was water in the environment	true
During the Pre-Archean and Archean, Earths interior was warmer than today. Mantle convection was faster and plate tectonics processes were more vigorous. Since subduction zones were more common, the early crustal plates were relatively small. Since the time that it was completely molten, Earth has been cooling. Still, about half the internal heat that was generated when Earth formed remains in the planet and is the source of the heat in the core and mantle today. 	earth has not cooled since right after the moon formed because of radioactivity	false
By the end of the Archean, about 2.5 billion years ago, plate tectonics processes were completely recognizable. Small Proterozoic continents known as microcontinents collided to create supercontinents, which resulted in the uplift of massive mountain ranges. The history of the North American craton is an example of what generally happened to the cratons during the Precambrian. As the craton drifted, it collided with microcontinents and oceanic island arcs, which were added to the continents. Convergence was especially active between 1.5 and 1.0 billion years ago. These lands came together to create the continent of Laurentia. About 1.1 billion years ago, Laurentia became part of the supercontinent Rodinia (Figure 1.1). Rodinia probably contained all of the landmass at the time, which was about 75% of the continental landmass present today. Rodinia broke up about 750 million years ago. The geological evidence for this breakup includes large lava flows that are found where continental rifting took place. Seafloor spreading eventually started and created the oceans between the continents. The breakup of Rodinia may have triggered Snowball Earth around 700 million years ago. 	the breakup of rodinia may have triggered snowball earth	true
By the end of the Archean, about 2.5 billion years ago, plate tectonics processes were completely recognizable. Small Proterozoic continents known as microcontinents collided to create supercontinents, which resulted in the uplift of massive mountain ranges. The history of the North American craton is an example of what generally happened to the cratons during the Precambrian. As the craton drifted, it collided with microcontinents and oceanic island arcs, which were added to the continents. Convergence was especially active between 1.5 and 1.0 billion years ago. These lands came together to create the continent of Laurentia. About 1.1 billion years ago, Laurentia became part of the supercontinent Rodinia (Figure 1.1). Rodinia probably contained all of the landmass at the time, which was about 75% of the continental landmass present today. Rodinia broke up about 750 million years ago. The geological evidence for this breakup includes large lava flows that are found where continental rifting took place. Seafloor spreading eventually started and created the oceans between the continents. The breakup of Rodinia may have triggered Snowball Earth around 700 million years ago. 	only about 25 of the continental landmass present today was part of rodinia	false
By the end of the Archean, about 2.5 billion years ago, plate tectonics processes were completely recognizable. Small Proterozoic continents known as microcontinents collided to create supercontinents, which resulted in the uplift of massive mountain ranges. The history of the North American craton is an example of what generally happened to the cratons during the Precambrian. As the craton drifted, it collided with microcontinents and oceanic island arcs, which were added to the continents. Convergence was especially active between 1.5 and 1.0 billion years ago. These lands came together to create the continent of Laurentia. About 1.1 billion years ago, Laurentia became part of the supercontinent Rodinia (Figure 1.1). Rodinia probably contained all of the landmass at the time, which was about 75% of the continental landmass present today. Rodinia broke up about 750 million years ago. The geological evidence for this breakup includes large lava flows that are found where continental rifting took place. Seafloor spreading eventually started and created the oceans between the continents. The breakup of Rodinia may have triggered Snowball Earth around 700 million years ago. 	the supercontinent rodinia contained all of the continents on earth before 2 billion years ago	false
By the end of the Archean, about 2.5 billion years ago, plate tectonics processes were completely recognizable. Small Proterozoic continents known as microcontinents collided to create supercontinents, which resulted in the uplift of massive mountain ranges. The history of the North American craton is an example of what generally happened to the cratons during the Precambrian. As the craton drifted, it collided with microcontinents and oceanic island arcs, which were added to the continents. Convergence was especially active between 1.5 and 1.0 billion years ago. These lands came together to create the continent of Laurentia. About 1.1 billion years ago, Laurentia became part of the supercontinent Rodinia (Figure 1.1). Rodinia probably contained all of the landmass at the time, which was about 75% of the continental landmass present today. Rodinia broke up about 750 million years ago. The geological evidence for this breakup includes large lava flows that are found where continental rifting took place. Seafloor spreading eventually started and created the oceans between the continents. The breakup of Rodinia may have triggered Snowball Earth around 700 million years ago. 	the supercontinent of rodinia was complete when laurentia collided with rodinia	true
Nations that have more industry produce more hazardous waste. Currently, the United States is the worlds largest producer of hazardous wastes, but China, which produces so many products for the developed world, may soon take over the number-one spot. Countries with more industry produce more hazardous wastes than those with little industry. Problems with haz- ardous wastes and their disposal became obvious sooner in the developed world than in the developing world. As a result, many developed nations, including the United States, have laws to help control hazardous waste disposal and to clean toxic sites. As mentioned in the "Impacts of Hazardous Waste" concept, the Superfund Act requires companies to clean up contaminated sites that are designated as Superfund sites (Figure 1.1). If a responsible party cannot be identified, because the company has gone out of business or its culpability cannot be proven, the federal government pays for the cleanup out of a trust fund with money put aside by the petroleum and chemical industries. As a result of the Superfund Act, companies today are more careful about how they deal with hazardous substances. Superfund sites are located all over the nation and many are waiting to be cleaned up. The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 requires that companies keep track of any hazardous materials they produce. These materials must be disposed of using government guidelines and records must be kept to show the government that the wastes were disposed of safely. Workers must be protected from the hazardous materials. To some extent, individuals can control the production and disposal of hazardous wastes. We can choose to use materials that are not hazardous, such as using vinegar as a cleanser. At home, people can control the amount of pesticides that they use (or they can use organic methods of pest control). It is also necessary to dispose of hazardous materials properly by not pouring them over the land, down the drain or toilet, or into a sewer or trashcan. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the government must oversee the superfund act because bo other organization is big enough to direct large corporations	true
Nations that have more industry produce more hazardous waste. Currently, the United States is the worlds largest producer of hazardous wastes, but China, which produces so many products for the developed world, may soon take over the number-one spot. Countries with more industry produce more hazardous wastes than those with little industry. Problems with haz- ardous wastes and their disposal became obvious sooner in the developed world than in the developing world. As a result, many developed nations, including the United States, have laws to help control hazardous waste disposal and to clean toxic sites. As mentioned in the "Impacts of Hazardous Waste" concept, the Superfund Act requires companies to clean up contaminated sites that are designated as Superfund sites (Figure 1.1). If a responsible party cannot be identified, because the company has gone out of business or its culpability cannot be proven, the federal government pays for the cleanup out of a trust fund with money put aside by the petroleum and chemical industries. As a result of the Superfund Act, companies today are more careful about how they deal with hazardous substances. Superfund sites are located all over the nation and many are waiting to be cleaned up. The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 requires that companies keep track of any hazardous materials they produce. These materials must be disposed of using government guidelines and records must be kept to show the government that the wastes were disposed of safely. Workers must be protected from the hazardous materials. To some extent, individuals can control the production and disposal of hazardous wastes. We can choose to use materials that are not hazardous, such as using vinegar as a cleanser. At home, people can control the amount of pesticides that they use (or they can use organic methods of pest control). It is also necessary to dispose of hazardous materials properly by not pouring them over the land, down the drain or toilet, or into a sewer or trashcan. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	it is okay to dispose hazardous material down the drain	false
Nations that have more industry produce more hazardous waste. Currently, the United States is the worlds largest producer of hazardous wastes, but China, which produces so many products for the developed world, may soon take over the number-one spot. Countries with more industry produce more hazardous wastes than those with little industry. Problems with haz- ardous wastes and their disposal became obvious sooner in the developed world than in the developing world. As a result, many developed nations, including the United States, have laws to help control hazardous waste disposal and to clean toxic sites. As mentioned in the "Impacts of Hazardous Waste" concept, the Superfund Act requires companies to clean up contaminated sites that are designated as Superfund sites (Figure 1.1). If a responsible party cannot be identified, because the company has gone out of business or its culpability cannot be proven, the federal government pays for the cleanup out of a trust fund with money put aside by the petroleum and chemical industries. As a result of the Superfund Act, companies today are more careful about how they deal with hazardous substances. Superfund sites are located all over the nation and many are waiting to be cleaned up. The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 requires that companies keep track of any hazardous materials they produce. These materials must be disposed of using government guidelines and records must be kept to show the government that the wastes were disposed of safely. Workers must be protected from the hazardous materials. To some extent, individuals can control the production and disposal of hazardous wastes. We can choose to use materials that are not hazardous, such as using vinegar as a cleanser. At home, people can control the amount of pesticides that they use (or they can use organic methods of pest control). It is also necessary to dispose of hazardous materials properly by not pouring them over the land, down the drain or toilet, or into a sewer or trashcan. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	new york michigan and california are the only locations of superfund sites	false
Nations that have more industry produce more hazardous waste. Currently, the United States is the worlds largest producer of hazardous wastes, but China, which produces so many products for the developed world, may soon take over the number-one spot. Countries with more industry produce more hazardous wastes than those with little industry. Problems with haz- ardous wastes and their disposal became obvious sooner in the developed world than in the developing world. As a result, many developed nations, including the United States, have laws to help control hazardous waste disposal and to clean toxic sites. As mentioned in the "Impacts of Hazardous Waste" concept, the Superfund Act requires companies to clean up contaminated sites that are designated as Superfund sites (Figure 1.1). If a responsible party cannot be identified, because the company has gone out of business or its culpability cannot be proven, the federal government pays for the cleanup out of a trust fund with money put aside by the petroleum and chemical industries. As a result of the Superfund Act, companies today are more careful about how they deal with hazardous substances. Superfund sites are located all over the nation and many are waiting to be cleaned up. The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 requires that companies keep track of any hazardous materials they produce. These materials must be disposed of using government guidelines and records must be kept to show the government that the wastes were disposed of safely. Workers must be protected from the hazardous materials. To some extent, individuals can control the production and disposal of hazardous wastes. We can choose to use materials that are not hazardous, such as using vinegar as a cleanser. At home, people can control the amount of pesticides that they use (or they can use organic methods of pest control). It is also necessary to dispose of hazardous materials properly by not pouring them over the land, down the drain or toilet, or into a sewer or trashcan. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	it is easier and cheaper to clean up a toxic waste site than to prevent the site from being contaminated in the first place	false
Sedimentary rocks follow certain rules. 1. Sedimentary rocks are formed with the oldest layers on the bottom and the youngest on top. 2. Sediments are deposited horizontally, so sedimentary rock layers are originally horizontal, as are some vol- canic rocks, such as ash falls. 3. Sedimentary rock layers that are not horizontal are deformed. Since sedimentary rocks follow these rules, they are useful for seeing the effects of stress on rocks. Sedimentary rocks that are not horizontal must have been deformed. You can trace the deformation a rock has experienced by seeing how it differs from its original horizontal, oldest- on-bottom position. This deformation produces geologic structures such as folds, joints, and faults that are caused by stresses. 	some volcanic rock types are laid down horizontally	true
Youre standing in the Grand Canyon and you see rocks like those in the Figure 1.1. Using the rules listed above, try to figure out the geologic history of the geologic column. The Grand Canyon is full mostly of sedimentary rocks, which are important for deciphering the geologic history of a region. In the Grand Canyon, the rock layers are exposed like a layer cake. Each layer is made of sediments that were deposited in a particular environment - perhaps a lake bed, shallow offshore region, or a sand dune. (a) The rocks of the Grand Canyon are like a layer cake. (b) A geologic column showing the rocks of the Grand Canyon. In this geologic column of the Grand Canyon, the sedimentary rocks of groups 3 through 6 are still horizontal. Group 2 rocks have been tilted. Group 1 rocks are not sedimentary. The oldest layers are on the bottom and youngest are on the top. The ways geologists figure out the geological history of an area will be explored more in the chapter Earth History. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	sedimentary rocks are useful for deciphering the geological history of an area	true
Youre standing in the Grand Canyon and you see rocks like those in the Figure 1.1. Using the rules listed above, try to figure out the geologic history of the geologic column. The Grand Canyon is full mostly of sedimentary rocks, which are important for deciphering the geologic history of a region. In the Grand Canyon, the rock layers are exposed like a layer cake. Each layer is made of sediments that were deposited in a particular environment - perhaps a lake bed, shallow offshore region, or a sand dune. (a) The rocks of the Grand Canyon are like a layer cake. (b) A geologic column showing the rocks of the Grand Canyon. In this geologic column of the Grand Canyon, the sedimentary rocks of groups 3 through 6 are still horizontal. Group 2 rocks have been tilted. Group 1 rocks are not sedimentary. The oldest layers are on the bottom and youngest are on the top. The ways geologists figure out the geological history of an area will be explored more in the chapter Earth History. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the rocks at the bottom of the grand canyon do not have layers they are sedimentary rocks that were laid down vertically	false
Youre standing in the Grand Canyon and you see rocks like those in the Figure 1.1. Using the rules listed above, try to figure out the geologic history of the geologic column. The Grand Canyon is full mostly of sedimentary rocks, which are important for deciphering the geologic history of a region. In the Grand Canyon, the rock layers are exposed like a layer cake. Each layer is made of sediments that were deposited in a particular environment - perhaps a lake bed, shallow offshore region, or a sand dune. (a) The rocks of the Grand Canyon are like a layer cake. (b) A geologic column showing the rocks of the Grand Canyon. In this geologic column of the Grand Canyon, the sedimentary rocks of groups 3 through 6 are still horizontal. Group 2 rocks have been tilted. Group 1 rocks are not sedimentary. The oldest layers are on the bottom and youngest are on the top. The ways geologists figure out the geological history of an area will be explored more in the chapter Earth History. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	fossils found in the top layer of sedimentary rocks are the oldest	false
In the photo of the Mesquite sand dune in Death Valley National Park, California (Figure 1.2), we see that wind can cause cross-bedding in sand. Cross-bedding is due to changes in wind direction. There are also ripples caused by the wind waving over the surface of the dune. Since we can observe wind forming sand dunes with these patterns now, we have a good explanation for how the Navajo sandstone formed. The Navajo sandstone is a rock formed from ancient sand dunes in which wind direction changed from time to time. This is just one example of how geologists use observations they make today to unravel what happened in Earths past. Rocks formed from volcanoes, oceans, rivers, and many other features are deciphered by looking at the geological work those features do today. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	ripple marks are caused by sand slumping down a dune face	false
James Hutton came up with this idea in the late 1700s. The present is the key to the past. He called this the principle of uniformitarianism. It is that if we can understand a geological process now and we find evidence of that same Checkerboard Mesa in Zion National Park, Utah. process in the past, then we can assume that the process operated the same way in the past. Hutton speculated that it has taken millions of years to shape the planet, and it is continuing to be changed. He said that there are slow, natural processes that changed, and continue to change, the planets landscape. For example, given enough time, a stream could erode a valley, or sediment could accumulate and form a new landform. Lets go back to that outcrop. What would cause sandstone to have layers that cross each other, a feature called cross-bedding? 	without the principle of uniformitarianism geologists could not understand earth history	true
The outcrop in the Figure 1.1 is at Checkerboard Mesa in Zion National Park, Utah. It has a very interesting pattern on it. As a geology student you may ask: how did this rock form? If you poke at the rock and analyze its chemistry you will see that its made of sand. In fact, the rock formation is called the Navajo sandstone. But knowing that the rock is sandstone doesnt tell you how it formed. It would be hard to design an experiment to show how this rock formed. But we can make observations now and apply them to this rock that formed long ago. 	navajo sandstone formed from volcanic eruptions	false
In the photo of the Mesquite sand dune in Death Valley National Park, California (Figure 1.2), we see that wind can cause cross-bedding in sand. Cross-bedding is due to changes in wind direction. There are also ripples caused by the wind waving over the surface of the dune. Since we can observe wind forming sand dunes with these patterns now, we have a good explanation for how the Navajo sandstone formed. The Navajo sandstone is a rock formed from ancient sand dunes in which wind direction changed from time to time. This is just one example of how geologists use observations they make today to unravel what happened in Earths past. Rocks formed from volcanoes, oceans, rivers, and many other features are deciphered by looking at the geological work those features do today. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	if crossbedded sandstone forms in dunes today it probably formed in dunes in the ancient past	true
James Hutton came up with this idea in the late 1700s. The present is the key to the past. He called this the principle of uniformitarianism. It is that if we can understand a geological process now and we find evidence of that same Checkerboard Mesa in Zion National Park, Utah. process in the past, then we can assume that the process operated the same way in the past. Hutton speculated that it has taken millions of years to shape the planet, and it is continuing to be changed. He said that there are slow, natural processes that changed, and continue to change, the planets landscape. For example, given enough time, a stream could erode a valley, or sediment could accumulate and form a new landform. Lets go back to that outcrop. What would cause sandstone to have layers that cross each other, a feature called cross-bedding? 	the idea that the present is the key to the past is called the principle of geology	false
Remember Nicholas Steno, who determined that fossils represented parts of once-living organisms? Steno also noticed that fossil seashells could be found in rocks and mountains far from any ocean. He wanted to explain how that could occur. Steno proposed that if a rock contained the fossils of marine animals, the rock formed from sediments that were deposited on the seafloor. These rocks were then uplifted to become mountains. This scenario led him to develop the principles that are discussed below. They are known as Stenos laws. Stenos laws are illustrated in Figure 1.1. Original horizontality: Sediments are deposited in fairly flat, horizontal layers. If a sedimentary rock is found tilted, the layer was tilted after it was formed. Lateral continuity: Sediments are deposited in continuous sheets that span the body of water that they are deposited in. When a valley cuts through sedimentary layers, it is assumed that the rocks on either side of the valley were originally continuous. Superposition: Sedimentary rocks are deposited one on top of another. The youngest layers are found at the top of the sequence, and the oldest layers are found at the bottom. (a) Original horizontality. (b) Lateral continuity. (c) Superposition. 	according to nicholas steno if a rock at the top of a mountain contains fossils of marine animals that rock formed in the sea and was uplifted into a mountain	true
Other scientists observed rock layers and formulated other principles. Geologist William Smith (1769-1839) identified the principle of faunal succession, which recognizes that: Some fossil types are never found with certain other fossil types (e.g. human ancestors are never found with dinosaurs) meaning that fossils in a rock layer represent what lived during the period the rock was deposited. Older features are replaced by more modern features in fossil organisms as species change through time; e.g. feathered dinosaurs precede birds in the fossil record. Fossil species with features that change distinctly and quickly can be used to determine the age of rock layers quite precisely. Scottish geologist, James Hutton (1726-1797) recognized the principle of cross-cutting relationships. This helps geologists to determine the older and younger of two rock units (Figure 1.2). If an igneous dike (B) cuts a series of metamorphic rocks (A), which is older and which is younger? In this image, A must have existed first for B to cut across it. 	fossils of human ancestors have been found with dinosaur fossils	false
Other scientists observed rock layers and formulated other principles. Geologist William Smith (1769-1839) identified the principle of faunal succession, which recognizes that: Some fossil types are never found with certain other fossil types (e.g. human ancestors are never found with dinosaurs) meaning that fossils in a rock layer represent what lived during the period the rock was deposited. Older features are replaced by more modern features in fossil organisms as species change through time; e.g. feathered dinosaurs precede birds in the fossil record. Fossil species with features that change distinctly and quickly can be used to determine the age of rock layers quite precisely. Scottish geologist, James Hutton (1726-1797) recognized the principle of cross-cutting relationships. This helps geologists to determine the older and younger of two rock units (Figure 1.2). If an igneous dike (B) cuts a series of metamorphic rocks (A), which is older and which is younger? In this image, A must have existed first for B to cut across it. 	feathered dinosaurs preceded birds in the fossil record	false
Plants and animals depend on water to live. They also play a role in the water cycle. Plants take up water from the soil and release large amounts of water vapor into the air through their leaves (Figure 1.3), a process known as transpiration. 	the only reason plants can grow in arid regions is that there is a lot of water trapped in the soil	false
Most of Earths water is stored in the oceans, where it can remain for hundreds or thousands of years. 	water can be stored for future use in snow and ice	true
People also depend on water as a natural resource. Not content to get water directly from streams or ponds, humans create canals, aqueducts, dams, and wells to collect water and direct it to where they want it (Figure 1.4). Clouds form above the Amazon Rainfor- est even in the dry season because of moisture from plant transpiration. Pont du Gard in France is an ancient aqueduct and bridge that was part of of a well-developed system that supplied wa- ter around the Roman empire. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	as far back as the roman empire humans diverted water to suit their own needs	true
What can individuals do to protect water quality? Find approved recycling or disposal facilities for motor oil and household chemicals. Use lawn, garden, and farm chemicals sparingly and wisely. Repair automobile or boat engine leaks immediately. Keep litter, pet waste, leaves, and grass clippings out of street gutters and storm drains. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	some water is purified enough for spreading on grass and some water is purified enough for drinking	true
What can individuals do to protect water quality? Find approved recycling or disposal facilities for motor oil and household chemicals. Use lawn, garden, and farm chemicals sparingly and wisely. Repair automobile or boat engine leaks immediately. Keep litter, pet waste, leaves, and grass clippings out of street gutters and storm drains. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	repairing automobile or boat engine leaks right away helps to protect water	true
Keeping water from becoming polluted often requires laws to be sure that people and companies behave responsibly. In the United States, the Clean Water Act gives the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) the authority to set standards for water quality for industry, agriculture, and domestic uses. The law gives the EPA the authority to reduce the discharge of pollution into waterways, finance wastewater treatment plants, and manage runoff. Since its passage in 1972, more wastewater treatment plants have been constructed and the release of industrial waste into the water supply is better controlled. Scientists control water pollution by sam- pling the water and studying the pollutants that are in the water. The United Nations and other international groups are working to improve global water quality standards by pro- viding the technology for treating water. These organizations also educate people in how to protect and improve the quality of the water they use (Figure 1.1). Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	when you take your dog to the park you should leave its waste in place to act as fertilizer for nearby plants	false
Water pollution can be reduced in two ways: Keep the water from becoming polluted. Clean water that is already polluted. 	keeping pollutants from getting into the water system is better than cleaning the water up after it is polluted	true
Some isotopes are radioactive; radioactive isotopes are unstable and spontaneously change by gaining or losing particles. Two types of radioactive decay are relevant to dating Earth materials (Table 1.1): Particle Alpha Composition 2 protons, 2 neutrons Beta 1 electron Effect on Nucleus The nucleus contains two fewer protons and two fewer neutrons. One neutron decays to form a pro- ton and an electron. The electron is emitted. The radioactive decay of a parent isotope (the original element) leads to the formation of stable daughter product, also known as daughter isotope. As time passes, the number of parent isotopes decreases and the number of daughter isotopes increases (Figure 1.1). 	a half life is the time it takes for half of the parent isotopes to change into daughter isotopes	true
Radioactivity is the tendency of certain atoms to decay into lighter atoms, a process that emits energy. Radioactivity also provides a way to find the absolute age of a rock. First, we need to know about radioactive decay. 	a radioactive isotope pair is only useful for as long as there is enough daughter to be able to count	false
Radiometric dating is the process of using the concentrations of radioactive substances and daughter products to estimate the age of a material. Different isotopes are used to date materials of different ages. Using more than one isotope helps scientists to check the accuracy of the ages that they calculate. 	radiometric dating uses the rate of decay of unstable isotopes to calculate the absolute ages of fossils and rocks	true
Radiocarbon dating is used to find the age of once-living materials between 100 and 50,000 years old. This range is especially useful for determining ages of human fossils and habitation sites (Figure 1.1). The atmosphere contains three isotopes of carbon: carbon-12, carbon-13 and carbon-14. Only carbon-14 is radioac- tive; it has a half-life of 5,730 years. The amount of carbon-14 in the atmosphere is tiny and has been relatively stable through time. Plants remove all three isotopes of carbon from the atmosphere during photosynthesis. Animals consume this carbon when they eat plants or other animals that have eaten plants. After the organisms death, the carbon-14 decays to stable nitrogen-14 by releasing a beta particle. The nitrogen atoms are lost to the atmosphere, but the amount of carbon-14 that has decayed can be estimated by measuring the proportion of radioactive carbon-14 to stable carbon- 12. As time passes, the amount of carbon-14 decreases relative to the amount of carbon-12. Carbon isotopes from the black material in these cave paintings places their cre- ating at about 26,000 to 27,000 years BP (before present). 	carbon14 decays to carbon12 with a halflife of 5730 years	false
Radiometric dating is the process of using the concentrations of radioactive substances and daughter products to estimate the age of a material. Different isotopes are used to date materials of different ages. Using more than one isotope helps scientists to check the accuracy of the ages that they calculate. 	potassiumargon and uraniumlead dating are useful for very young materials	false
Two uranium isotopes are used for radiometric dating. Uranium-238 decays to lead-206 with a half-life of 4.47 billion years. Uranium-235 decays to form lead-207 with a half-life of 704 million years. Uranium-lead dating is usually performed on zircon crystals (Figure 1.2). When zircon forms in an igneous rock, the crystals readily accept atoms of uranium but reject atoms of lead. If any lead is found in a zircon crystal, it can be assumed that it was produced from the decay of uranium. Uranium-lead dating is useful for dating igneous rocks from 1 million years to around 4.6 billion years old. Zircon crystals from Australia are 4.4 billion years old, among the oldest rocks on the planet. 	uraniumlead has been used to calculate the ages of zircon crystals that are 44 billion years old	true
Reducing air pollution from vehicles can be done in a number of ways. Breaking down pollutants before they are released into the atmosphere. Motor vehicles emit less pollution than they once did because of catalytic converters (Figure 1.1). Catalytic converters contain a catalyst that speeds up chemical reactions and breaks down nitrous oxides, carbon monoxide, and VOCs. Catalytic converters only work when they are hot, so a lot of exhaust escapes as the car is warming up. Catalytic converters are placed on mod- ern cars in the United States. Making a vehicle more fuel efficient. Lighter, more streamlined vehicles need less energy. Hybrid vehicles have an electric motor and a rechargeable battery. The energy that would be lost during braking is funneled into charging the battery, which then can power the car. The internal combustion engine only takes over when power in the battery has run out. Hybrids can reduce auto emissions by 90% or more, but many models do not maximize the possible fuel efficiency of the vehicle. A plug-in hybrid is plugged into an electricity source when it is not in use, perhaps in a garage, to make sure that the battery is charged. Plug-in hybrids run for a longer time on electricity and so are less polluting than regular hybrids. Plug-in hybrids began to become available in 2010. Developing new technologies that do not use fossil fuels. Fueling a car with something other than a liquid organic-based fuel is difficult. A fuel cell converts chemical energy into electrical energy. Hydrogen fuel cells harness the energy released when hydrogen and oxygen come together to create water (Figure 1.2). Fuel cells are extremely efficient and they produce no pollutants. But developing fuel-cell technology has had many problems and no one knows when or if they will become practical. 	plugin hybrids run for a longer time on electricity than regular hybrids	true
The Clean Air Act of 1970 and the amendments since then have done a great job in requiring people to clean up the air over the United States. Emissions of the six major pollutants regulated by the Clean Air Act  carbon monoxide, lead, nitrous oxides, ozone, sulfur dioxide, and particulates  have decreased by more than 50%. Cars, power plants, and factories individually release less pollution than they did in the mid-20th century. But there are many more cars, power plants, and factories. Many pollutants are still being released and some substances have been found to be pollutants that were not known to be pollutants in the past. There is still much work to be done to continue to clean up the air. 	the six major pollutants have decreased by more than 50 since the clean air act of 1970 was implemented	true
Two years after the British Antarctic Survey report, the "Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer" was ratified by nations all over the world. The Montreal Protocol controls the production and consumption of 96 chemicals that damage the ozone layer (Figure 1.1). Hazardous substances are phased out first by developed nations and one decade later by developing nations. More hazardous substances are phased out more quickly. CFCs have been mostly phased out since 1995, although were used in developing nations until 2010. Some of the less hazardous substances will not be phased out until 2030. The Protocol also requires that wealthier nations donate money to develop technologies that will replace these chemicals. Ozone levels over North America decreased between 1974 and 2009. Models of the future predict what ozone levels would have been if CFCs were not being phased out. Warmer colors indicate more ozone. Since CFCs take many years to reach the stratosphere and can survive there a long time before they break down, the ozone hole will probably continue to grow for some time before it begins to shrink. The ozone layer will reach the same levels it had before 1980 around 2068 and 1950 levels in one or two centuries. 	the ozone hole will be back to its pre1980 levels in one to two centuries	true
Two years after the British Antarctic Survey report, the "Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer" was ratified by nations all over the world. The Montreal Protocol controls the production and consumption of 96 chemicals that damage the ozone layer (Figure 1.1). Hazardous substances are phased out first by developed nations and one decade later by developing nations. More hazardous substances are phased out more quickly. CFCs have been mostly phased out since 1995, although were used in developing nations until 2010. Some of the less hazardous substances will not be phased out until 2030. The Protocol also requires that wealthier nations donate money to develop technologies that will replace these chemicals. Ozone levels over North America decreased between 1974 and 2009. Models of the future predict what ozone levels would have been if CFCs were not being phased out. Warmer colors indicate more ozone. Since CFCs take many years to reach the stratosphere and can survive there a long time before they break down, the ozone hole will probably continue to grow for some time before it begins to shrink. The ozone layer will reach the same levels it had before 1980 around 2068 and 1950 levels in one or two centuries. 	wealthier nations have donated money to develop technologies that will replace ozone destroying chemicals	true
Copernicus, Galileo, and Kepler were all right: Earth and the other planets travel in an elliptical orbit around the Sun. The gravitational pull of the Sun keeps the planets in orbit. This ellipse is barely elliptical; its very close to being a circle. The closest Earth gets to the Sun each year is at perihelion (147 million km) on about January 3rd, and the furthest is at aphelion (152 million km) on July 4th. The shape of Earths orbit has nothing to do with Earths seasons. Earth and the other planets in the solar system make elliptical orbits around the Sun. For Earth to make one complete revolution around the Sun takes 365.24 days. This amount of time is the definition of one year. Earth has one large moon, which orbits Earth once every 29.5 days, a period known as a month. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the suns gravitational pull keeps the planets in orbit	true
To an observer, Earth appears to be the center of the universe. That is what the ancient Greeks believed. This view is called the geocentric model, or "Earth-centered" model, of the universe. In the geocentric model, the sky, or heavens, are a set of spheres layered on top of one another. Each object in the sky is attached to a sphere and moves around Earth as that sphere rotates. From Earth outward, these spheres contain the Moon, Mercury, Venus, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. An outer sphere holds all the stars. Since the planets appear to move much faster than the stars, the Greeks placed them closer to Earth. The geocentric model explained why all the stars appear to rotate around Earth once per day. The model also explained why the planets move differently from the stars and from each other. One problem with the geocentric model is that some planets seem to move backwards (in retrograde) instead of in their usual forward motion around Earth. Around 150 A.D. the astronomer Ptolemy resolved this problem by using a system of circles to describe the motion of planets (Figure 1.1). In Ptolemys system, a planet moves in a small circle, called an epicycle. This circle moves around Earth in a larger circle, called a deferent. Ptolemys version of the geocentric model worked so well that it remained the accepted model of the universe for more than a thousand years. 	the planets appear to move slower than the stars	false
Certainly no one today doubts that Earth orbits a star, the Sun. Photos taken from space, observations made by astronauts, and the fact that there has been so much successful space exploration that depends on understanding the structure of the solar system all confirm it. But in the early 17th century saying that Earth orbited the Sun rather than the reverse could get you tried for heresy, as it did Galileo. Lets explore the evolution of the idea that Earth orbits the Sun. 	ptolomys system worked so well that no one questioned it until the 20th century	false
Copernicus, Galileo, and Kepler were all right: Earth and the other planets travel in an elliptical orbit around the Sun. The gravitational pull of the Sun keeps the planets in orbit. This ellipse is barely elliptical; its very close to being a circle. The closest Earth gets to the Sun each year is at perihelion (147 million km) on about January 3rd, and the furthest is at aphelion (152 million km) on July 4th. The shape of Earths orbit has nothing to do with Earths seasons. Earth and the other planets in the solar system make elliptical orbits around the Sun. For Earth to make one complete revolution around the Sun takes 365.24 days. This amount of time is the definition of one year. Earth has one large moon, which orbits Earth once every 29.5 days, a period known as a month. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	copernicus proposed that the planets orbit the sun the heliocentric model	true
A rock is a naturally formed, non-living Earth material. Rocks are made of collections of mineral grains that are held together in a firm, solid mass (Figure 1.1). How is a rock different from a mineral? Rocks are made of minerals. The mineral grains in a rock may be so tiny that you can only see them with a microscope, or they may be as big as your fingernail or even your finger (Figure Rocks are identified primarily by the minerals they contain and by their texture. Each type of rock has a distinctive set of minerals. A rock may be made of grains of all one mineral type, such as quartzite. Much more commonly, rocks are made of a mixture of different minerals. Texture is a description of the size, shape, and arrangement of mineral grains. Are the two samples in Figure 1.3 the same rock type? Do they have the same minerals? The same texture? The different colors and textures seen in this rock are caused by the presence of different minerals. A pegmatite from South Dakota with crystals of lepidolite, tourmaline, and quartz (1 cm scale on the upper left). Sample 2 Crystals are tiny or microscopic Magma erupted and cooled quickly Andesite As seen in Table 1.1, these two rocks have the same chemical composition and contain mostly the same minerals, but they do not have the same texture. Sample 1 has visible mineral grains, but Sample 2 has very tiny or invisible grains. The two different textures indicate different histories. Sample 1 is a diorite, a rock that cooled slowly from magma (molten rock) underground. Sample 2 is an andesite, a rock that cooled rapidly from a very similar magma that erupted onto Earths surface. A few rocks are not made of minerals because the material they are made of does not fit the definition of a mineral. Coal, for example, is made of organic material, which is not a mineral. Can you think of other rocks that are not made of minerals? Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	a rock made of grains that are so tiny they cannot be seen without a microscope is a rock but it is not made of minerals	false
A rock is a naturally formed, non-living Earth material. Rocks are made of collections of mineral grains that are held together in a firm, solid mass (Figure 1.1). How is a rock different from a mineral? Rocks are made of minerals. The mineral grains in a rock may be so tiny that you can only see them with a microscope, or they may be as big as your fingernail or even your finger (Figure Rocks are identified primarily by the minerals they contain and by their texture. Each type of rock has a distinctive set of minerals. A rock may be made of grains of all one mineral type, such as quartzite. Much more commonly, rocks are made of a mixture of different minerals. Texture is a description of the size, shape, and arrangement of mineral grains. Are the two samples in Figure 1.3 the same rock type? Do they have the same minerals? The same texture? The different colors and textures seen in this rock are caused by the presence of different minerals. A pegmatite from South Dakota with crystals of lepidolite, tourmaline, and quartz (1 cm scale on the upper left). Sample 2 Crystals are tiny or microscopic Magma erupted and cooled quickly Andesite As seen in Table 1.1, these two rocks have the same chemical composition and contain mostly the same minerals, but they do not have the same texture. Sample 1 has visible mineral grains, but Sample 2 has very tiny or invisible grains. The two different textures indicate different histories. Sample 1 is a diorite, a rock that cooled slowly from magma (molten rock) underground. Sample 2 is an andesite, a rock that cooled rapidly from a very similar magma that erupted onto Earths surface. A few rocks are not made of minerals because the material they are made of does not fit the definition of a mineral. Coal, for example, is made of organic material, which is not a mineral. Can you think of other rocks that are not made of minerals? Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	not all rocks contain grains that fit the definition of a mineral	true
Several processes can turn one type of rock into another type of rock. The key processes of the rock cycle are crystallization, erosion and sedimentation, and metamorphism. 	all rocks and rock types are part of the rock cycle	true
Rocks are classified into three major groups according to how they form. These three types are described in more detail in other concepts in this chapter, but here is a summary. The Rock Cycle. Igneous rocks form from the cooling and hardening of molten magma in many different environments. The chemical composition of the magma and the rate at which it cools determine what rock forms. Igneous rocks can cool slowly beneath the surface or rapidly at the surface. These rocks are identified by their composition and texture. More than 700 different types of igneous rocks are known. Sedimentary rocks form by the compaction and cementing together of sediments, broken pieces of rock-like gravel, sand, silt, or clay. Those sediments can be formed from the weathering and erosion of preexisting rocks. Sedimentary rocks also include chemical precipitates, the solid materials left behind after a liquid evaporates. Metamorphic rocks form when the minerals in an existing rock are changed by heat or pressure below the surface. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	rocks are classified into four major groups reflecting how they formed intrusive extrusive metamorphic and sedimentary	false
Magma cools either underground or on the surface and hardens into an igneous rock. As the magma cools, different crystals form at different temperatures, undergoing crystallization. For example, the mineral olivine crystallizes out of magma at much higher temperatures than quartz. The rate of cooling determines how much time the crystals will have to form. Slow cooling produces larger crystals. 	in crystallization slower cooling forms smaller crystals	false
Several processes can turn one type of rock into another type of rock. The key processes of the rock cycle are crystallization, erosion and sedimentation, and metamorphism. 	a rock transforms from one type to another by the processes of the rock cycle but once it is transformed it is out of the rock cycle	false
Earth rotates once on its axis about every 24 hours. To an observer looking down at the North Pole, the rotation appears counterclockwise. From nearly all points on Earth, the Sun appears to move across the sky from east to west each day. Of course, the Sun is not moving from east to west at all; Earth is rotating. The Moon and stars also seem to rise in the east and set in the west. Earths rotation means that there is a cycle of daylight and darkness approximately every 24 hours, the length of a day. Different places experience sunset and sunrise at different times and the amount of daylight and darkness also differs by location. Shadows are areas where an object obstructs a light source so that darkness takes on the form of the object. On Earth, a shadow can be cast by the Sun, Moon, or (rarely) Mercury or Venus. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the sun appears to move across the sky from west to east each day	false
Imagine a line passing through the center of Earth that goes through both the North Pole and the South Pole. This imaginary line is called an axis. Earth spins around its axis, just as a top spins around its spindle. This spinning movement is called Earths rotation. An observer in space will see that Earth requires 23 hours, 59 minutes, and 4 seconds to make one complete rotation on its axis. But because Earth moves around the Sun at the same time that it is rotating, the planet must turn just a little bit more to reach the same place relative to the Sun. Hence the length of a day on Earth is actually 24 hours. At the Equator, the Earth rotates at a speed of about 1,700 km per hour, but at the poles the movement speed is nearly nothing. 	a molecule at the equator rotates extremely fast but a molecule at the south pole barely moves at all	true
Earth rotates once on its axis about every 24 hours. To an observer looking down at the North Pole, the rotation appears counterclockwise. From nearly all points on Earth, the Sun appears to move across the sky from east to west each day. Of course, the Sun is not moving from east to west at all; Earth is rotating. The Moon and stars also seem to rise in the east and set in the west. Earths rotation means that there is a cycle of daylight and darkness approximately every 24 hours, the length of a day. Different places experience sunset and sunrise at different times and the amount of daylight and darkness also differs by location. Shadows are areas where an object obstructs a light source so that darkness takes on the form of the object. On Earth, a shadow can be cast by the Sun, Moon, or (rarely) Mercury or Venus. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the direction that the stars appear to move across the sky is due to earths rotation	true
Waterborne disease caused by unsafe drinking water is the leading cause of death for children under the age of five in many nations and a cause of death and illness for many adults. About 88% of all diseases are caused by drinking unsafe water (Figure 1.1). Throughout the world, more than 14,000 people die every day from waterborne diseases, such as cholera, and many of the worlds hospital beds are occupied by patients suffering from a waterborne disease. Guinea worm is a serious problem in parts of Africa that is being eradicated. Learn what is being done to decrease the number of people suffering from this parasite at the video below. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	in many nations diseases carried in drinking water are the leading cause of death for children under the age of five	true
Many people in the world have no choice but to drink from the same polluted river where sewage is dumped. One- fifth of all people in the world, more than 1.1 billion people, do not have access to safe water for drinking, personal cleanliness, and domestic use. Unsafe drinking water carries many pathogens, or disease-causing biological agents such as infectious bacteria and parasites. Toxic chemicals and radiological hazards in water can also cause diseases. 	dracunculiasis spreads when people drink adult guinea worms	false
Waterborne disease caused by unsafe drinking water is the leading cause of death for children under the age of five in many nations and a cause of death and illness for many adults. About 88% of all diseases are caused by drinking unsafe water (Figure 1.1). Throughout the world, more than 14,000 people die every day from waterborne diseases, such as cholera, and many of the worlds hospital beds are occupied by patients suffering from a waterborne disease. Guinea worm is a serious problem in parts of Africa that is being eradicated. Learn what is being done to decrease the number of people suffering from this parasite at the video below. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the solution to stopping the spread of waterborne diseases is always large expensive public work projects	false
Many people in the world have no choice but to drink from the same polluted river where sewage is dumped. One- fifth of all people in the world, more than 1.1 billion people, do not have access to safe water for drinking, personal cleanliness, and domestic use. Unsafe drinking water carries many pathogens, or disease-causing biological agents such as infectious bacteria and parasites. Toxic chemicals and radiological hazards in water can also cause diseases. 	people in developed nations dont think much about waterborne diseases because our water is treated and is almost always safe to drink	true
A rocket is propelled into space by particles flying out of one end at high speed (see Figure 1.1). A rocket in space moves like a skater holding the fire extinguisher. Fuel is ignited in a chamber, which causes an explosion of gases. The explosion creates pressure that forces the gases out of the rocket. As these gases rush out the end, the rocket moves in the opposite direction, as predicted by Newtons Third Law of Motion. The reaction force of the gases on the rocket pushes the rocket forward. The force pushing the rocket is called thrust. Nothing would get into space without being thrust upward by a rocket. 	for every action there is an equal and opposite reaction also known as thrust	true
Saturn, shown in Figure 1.1, is famous for its beautiful rings. Although all the gas giants have rings, only Saturns can be easily seen from Earth. In Roman mythology, Saturn was the father of Jupiter. Saturns mass is about 95 times the mass of Earth, and its volume is 755 times Earths volume, making it the second largest planet in the solar system. Saturn is also the least dense planet in the solar system. It is less dense than water. What would happen if you had a large enough bathtub to put Saturn in? Saturn would float! Saturn orbits the Sun once about every 30 Earth years. Like Jupiter, Saturn is made mostly of hydrogen and helium gases in the outer layers and liquids at greater depths. The upper atmosphere has clouds in bands of different colors. These rotate rapidly around the planet, but there seems to be less turbulence and fewer storms on Saturn than on Jupiter. One interesting phenomenon that has been observed in the storms on Saturn is the presence of thunder and lightning (see video, below). The planet likely has a small rocky and metallic core. This image of Saturn and its rings is a composite of pictures taken by the Cassini orbiter in 2008 	if you could find a bathtub big enough you could put enough water to float saturn in it	true
In 1610, Galileo first observed Saturns rings with his telescope, but he thought they might be two large moons, one on either side of the planet. In 1659, the Dutch astronomer Christian Huygens realized that the features were rings (Figure 1.2). Saturns rings circle the planets equator and appear tilted because Saturn itself is tilted about 27 degrees. The rings do not touch the planet. The Voyager 1 and 2 spacecraft in 1980 and 1981 sent back detailed pictures of Saturn, its rings, and some of its moons. Saturns rings are made of particles of water and ice, with some dust and rocks (Figure 1.3). There are several gaps in the rings that scientists think have originated because the material was cleared out by the gravitational pull within the rings, or by the gravitational forces of Saturn and of moons outside the rings. The rings were likely formed by the breakup of one of Saturns moons or from material that never accreted into the planet when Saturn originally formed. 	saturns rings are connected to the planet	false
Most of Saturns moons are very small, and only seven are large enough for gravity to have made them spherical. Only Titan is larger than Earths Moon at about 1.5 times its size. Titan is even larger than the planet Mercury. Scientists are interested in Titan because its atmosphere is similar to what Earths was like before life developed. Nitrogen is dominant and methane is the second most abundant gas. Titan may have a layer of liquid water and ammonia under a layer of surface ice. Lakes of liquid methane (CH4 ) and ethane (C2 H6 ) are found on Titans surface. Although conditions are similar enough to those of early Earth for scientists to speculate that extremely A color-exaggerated mosaic of Saturn and its rings taken by Cassini as Saturn eclipses the Sun. A close-up of Saturns outer C ring show- ing areas with higher particle concentra- tion and gaps. This composite image compares Saturns largest moon, Titan (right) to Earth (left). Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	saturns atmosphere is just as stormy s jupiters	false
In 1610, Galileo first observed Saturns rings with his telescope, but he thought they might be two large moons, one on either side of the planet. In 1659, the Dutch astronomer Christian Huygens realized that the features were rings (Figure 1.2). Saturns rings circle the planets equator and appear tilted because Saturn itself is tilted about 27 degrees. The rings do not touch the planet. The Voyager 1 and 2 spacecraft in 1980 and 1981 sent back detailed pictures of Saturn, its rings, and some of its moons. Saturns rings are made of particles of water and ice, with some dust and rocks (Figure 1.3). There are several gaps in the rings that scientists think have originated because the material was cleared out by the gravitational pull within the rings, or by the gravitational forces of Saturn and of moons outside the rings. The rings were likely formed by the breakup of one of Saturns moons or from material that never accreted into the planet when Saturn originally formed. 	scientists are certain that saturns rings formed when one if its moons broke apart	false
Since models are simpler than real objects or systems, they have limitations. A model deals with only a portion of a system. It may not predict the behavior of the real system very accurately. But the more computing power that goes into the model and the care with which the scientists construct the model can increase the chances that a model will be accurate. 	models can be used to make predictions	true
Since models are simpler than real objects or systems, they have limitations. A model deals with only a portion of a system. It may not predict the behavior of the real system very accurately. But the more computing power that goes into the model and the care with which the scientists construct the model can increase the chances that a model will be accurate. 	a map of the entire world is an accurate physical model	false
Since models are simpler than real objects or systems, they have limitations. A model deals with only a portion of a system. It may not predict the behavior of the real system very accurately. But the more computing power that goes into the model and the care with which the scientists construct the model can increase the chances that a model will be accurate. 	computers that use mathematical models to predict the weather are always accurate	false
Seafloor spreading is the mechanism for Wegeners drifting continents. Convection currents within the mantle take the continents on a conveyor-belt ride of oceanic crust that, over millions of years, takes them around the planets surface. The spreading plate takes along any continent that rides on it. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	older crust is hot and more buoyant than younger crust	false
The features of the seafloor and the patterns of magnetic polarity symmetrically about the mid-ocean ridges were the pieces that Hess needed. He resurrected Wegeners continental drift hypothesis and also the mantle convection idea of Holmes. Hess wrote that hot magma rose up into the rift valley at the mid-ocean ridges. The lava oozed up and forced the existing seafloor away from the rift in opposite directions. Since magnetite crystals point in the direction of the magnetic north pole as the lava cools, the different stripes of magnetic polarity revealed the different ages of the seafloor. The seafloor at the ridge is from the Brunhes normal; beyond that is basalt from the Matuyama reverse; and beyond that from the Gauss normal. Hess called this idea seafloor spreading. As oceanic crust forms and spreads, moving away from the ridge crest, it pushes the continent away from the ridge axis. If the oceanic crust reaches a deep sea trench, it sinks into the trench and is lost into the mantle. The oldest crust is coldest and lies deepest in the ocean because it is less buoyant than the hot new crust. Hess could also use seafloor spreading to explain the flat topped guyots. He suggested that they were once active volcanoes that were exposed to erosion above sea level. As the seafloor they sat on moved away from the ridge, the crust on which they sat become less buoyant and the guyots moved deeper beneath sea level. 	the rock made underwater from cooled lava is basalt	true
A common misconception is that the Sun is closer to Earth in the summer and farther away from it during the winter. Instead, the seasons are caused by the 23.5o tilt of Earths axis of rotation relative to its plane of orbit around the Sun (Figure 1.1). Solstice refers to the position of the Sun when it is closest to one of the poles. At summer solstice, June 21 or 22, Earths axis points toward the Sun and so the Sun is directly overhead at its furthest north point of the year, the Tropic of Cancer (23.5o N). During the summer, areas north of the Equator experience longer days and shorter nights. In the Southern Hemi- sphere, the Sun is as far away as it will be and so it is their winter. Locations will have longer nights and shorter days. The opposite occurs on winter solstice, which begins on December 21. More about seasons can be found in the Atmospheric Processes chapter. 	during the summer we experience shorter days and longer nights	false
Different parts of the Earth receive different amounts of solar radiation. Which part of the planet receives the most solar radiation? The Suns rays strike the surface most directly at the Equator. Different areas also receive different amounts of sunlight in different seasons. What causes the seasons? The seasons are caused by the direction Earths axis is pointing relative to the Sun. The Earth revolves around the Sun once each year and spins on its axis of rotation once each day. This axis of rotation is tilted 23.5o relative to its plane of orbit around the Sun. The axis of rotation is pointed toward Polaris, the North Star. As the Earth orbits the Sun, the tilt of Earths axis stays lined up with the North Star. 	earths axis of rotation is pointed toward polaris the north star in the summer but away from polar in the winter	false
Halfway between the two solstices, the Suns rays shine most directly at the Equator, called an equinox (Figure 1.4). The daylight and nighttime hours are exactly equal on an equinox. The autumnal equinox happens on September 22 or 23 and the vernal, or spring, equinox happens March 21 or 22 in the Northern Hemisphere. Summer solstice in the Northern Hemisphere. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the vernal equinox happens around september 22 or 23	true
Where does the salt in seawater come from? As water moves through rock and soil on land it picks up ions. This is the flip side of weathering. Salts comprise about 3.5% of the mass of ocean water, but the salt content, or salinity, is different in different locations. What would the salinity be like in an estuary? Where seawater mixes with fresh water, salinity is lower than average. What would the salinity be like where there is lots of evaporation? Where there is lots of evaporation but little circulation of water, salinity can be much higher. The Dead Sea has 30% salinity  nearly nine times the average salinity of ocean water (Figure 1.2). Why do you think this water body is called the Dead Sea? In some areas, dense saltwater and less dense freshwater mix, and they form an immiscible layer, just like oil and water. One such place is a "cenote", or underground cave, very common in certain parts of Central America. Ocean water is composed of many sub- stances, many of them salts such as sodium, magnesium, and calcium chlo- ride. Because of the increased salinity, the wa- ter in the Dead Sea is very dense, it has such high salinity that people can easily float in it! 	all salt is dangerous for humans and we should eat only a tiny amount each day	false
With so many dissolved substances mixed in seawater, what is the density (mass per volume) of seawater relative to fresh water? Water density increases as: salinity increases temperature decreases pressure increases Differences in water density are responsible for deep ocean currents, as will be discussed in the "Deep Ocean Currents" concept. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	chlorine is the most abundant cation in seawater	false
Rock Conglomerate Breccia Sandstone Siltstone Shale Sediment Size Large Large Sand-sized Silt-sized, smaller than sand Clay-sized, smallest Other Features Rounded Angular When sediments settle out of calmer water, they form horizontal layers. One layer is deposited first, and another layer is deposited on top of it. So each layer is younger than the layer beneath it. When the sediments harden, the layers are preserved. Sedimentary rocks formed by the crystallization of chemical precipitates are called chemical sedimentary rocks. As discussed in the concepts on minerals, dissolved ions in fluids precipitate out of the fluid and settle out, just like the halite in Figure 1.1. The evaporite, halite, on a cobble from the Dead Sea, Israel. Biochemical sedimentary rocks form in the ocean or a salt lake. Living creatures remove ions, such as calcium, magnesium, and potassium, from the water to make shells or soft tissue. When the organism dies, it sinks to the ocean floor to become a biochemical sediment, which may then become compacted and cemented into solid rock (Figure 1.2). Table 1.2 shows some common types of sedimentary rocks. Breccia Clastic Sandstone Clastic Siltstone Clastic Shale Clastic Rock Salt Chemical precipitate Dolostone Chemical precipitate Limestone Bioclastic (sediments from organic materials, or plant or animal re- mains) Coal Organic Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	biochemical sedimentary rocks from in oceans or salt lakes	true
Rock Conglomerate Breccia Sandstone Siltstone Shale Sediment Size Large Large Sand-sized Silt-sized, smaller than sand Clay-sized, smallest Other Features Rounded Angular When sediments settle out of calmer water, they form horizontal layers. One layer is deposited first, and another layer is deposited on top of it. So each layer is younger than the layer beneath it. When the sediments harden, the layers are preserved. Sedimentary rocks formed by the crystallization of chemical precipitates are called chemical sedimentary rocks. As discussed in the concepts on minerals, dissolved ions in fluids precipitate out of the fluid and settle out, just like the halite in Figure 1.1. The evaporite, halite, on a cobble from the Dead Sea, Israel. Biochemical sedimentary rocks form in the ocean or a salt lake. Living creatures remove ions, such as calcium, magnesium, and potassium, from the water to make shells or soft tissue. When the organism dies, it sinks to the ocean floor to become a biochemical sediment, which may then become compacted and cemented into solid rock (Figure 1.2). Table 1.2 shows some common types of sedimentary rocks. Breccia Clastic Sandstone Clastic Siltstone Clastic Shale Clastic Rock Salt Chemical precipitate Dolostone Chemical precipitate Limestone Bioclastic (sediments from organic materials, or plant or animal re- mains) Coal Organic Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	rock salt is a clastic rock	false
Sandstone is one of the common types of sedimentary rocks that form from sediments. There are many other types. Sediments may include: fragments of other rocks that often have been worn down into small pieces, such as sand, silt, or clay. organic materials, or the remains of once-living organisms. chemical precipitates, which are materials that get left behind after the water evaporates from a solution. Rocks at the surface undergo mechanical and chemical weathering. These physical and chemical processes break rock into smaller pieces. Mechanical weathering simply breaks the rocks apart. Chemical weathering dissolves the less stable minerals. These original elements of the minerals end up in solution and new minerals may form. Sediments are removed and transported by water, wind, ice, or gravity in a process called erosion (Figure 1.1). Much more information about weathering and erosion can be found in the chapter Surface Processes and Landforms. Streams carry huge amounts of sediment (Figure 1.2). The more energy the water has, the larger the particle it can carry. A rushing river on a steep slope might be able to carry boulders. As this stream slows down, it no longer has the energy to carry large sediments and will drop them. A slower moving stream will only carry smaller particles. Water erodes the land surface in Alaskas Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes. Sediments are deposited on beaches and deserts, at the bottom of oceans, and in lakes, ponds, rivers, marshes, and swamps. Landslides drop large piles of sediment. Glaciers leave large piles of sediments, too. Wind can only transport sand and smaller particles. The type of sediment that is deposited will determine the type of sedimentary rock that can form. Different colors of sedimentary rock are determined by the environment where they are deposited. Red rocks form where oxygen is present. Darker sediments form when the environment is oxygen poor. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	darker sediments form when the environment is oxygen rich	false
Sandstone is one of the common types of sedimentary rocks that form from sediments. There are many other types. Sediments may include: fragments of other rocks that often have been worn down into small pieces, such as sand, silt, or clay. organic materials, or the remains of once-living organisms. chemical precipitates, which are materials that get left behind after the water evaporates from a solution. Rocks at the surface undergo mechanical and chemical weathering. These physical and chemical processes break rock into smaller pieces. Mechanical weathering simply breaks the rocks apart. Chemical weathering dissolves the less stable minerals. These original elements of the minerals end up in solution and new minerals may form. Sediments are removed and transported by water, wind, ice, or gravity in a process called erosion (Figure 1.1). Much more information about weathering and erosion can be found in the chapter Surface Processes and Landforms. Streams carry huge amounts of sediment (Figure 1.2). The more energy the water has, the larger the particle it can carry. A rushing river on a steep slope might be able to carry boulders. As this stream slows down, it no longer has the energy to carry large sediments and will drop them. A slower moving stream will only carry smaller particles. Water erodes the land surface in Alaskas Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes. Sediments are deposited on beaches and deserts, at the bottom of oceans, and in lakes, ponds, rivers, marshes, and swamps. Landslides drop large piles of sediment. Glaciers leave large piles of sediments, too. Wind can only transport sand and smaller particles. The type of sediment that is deposited will determine the type of sedimentary rock that can form. Different colors of sedimentary rock are determined by the environment where they are deposited. Red rocks form where oxygen is present. Darker sediments form when the environment is oxygen poor. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	organic materials are made from the remains of onceliving organisms	true
Sandstone is one of the common types of sedimentary rocks that form from sediments. There are many other types. Sediments may include: fragments of other rocks that often have been worn down into small pieces, such as sand, silt, or clay. organic materials, or the remains of once-living organisms. chemical precipitates, which are materials that get left behind after the water evaporates from a solution. Rocks at the surface undergo mechanical and chemical weathering. These physical and chemical processes break rock into smaller pieces. Mechanical weathering simply breaks the rocks apart. Chemical weathering dissolves the less stable minerals. These original elements of the minerals end up in solution and new minerals may form. Sediments are removed and transported by water, wind, ice, or gravity in a process called erosion (Figure 1.1). Much more information about weathering and erosion can be found in the chapter Surface Processes and Landforms. Streams carry huge amounts of sediment (Figure 1.2). The more energy the water has, the larger the particle it can carry. A rushing river on a steep slope might be able to carry boulders. As this stream slows down, it no longer has the energy to carry large sediments and will drop them. A slower moving stream will only carry smaller particles. Water erodes the land surface in Alaskas Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes. Sediments are deposited on beaches and deserts, at the bottom of oceans, and in lakes, ponds, rivers, marshes, and swamps. Landslides drop large piles of sediment. Glaciers leave large piles of sediments, too. Wind can only transport sand and smaller particles. The type of sediment that is deposited will determine the type of sedimentary rock that can form. Different colors of sedimentary rock are determined by the environment where they are deposited. Red rocks form where oxygen is present. Darker sediments form when the environment is oxygen poor. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	erosion is the process in which sediments are removed and transported by water wind ice or gravity	true
Sandstone is one of the common types of sedimentary rocks that form from sediments. There are many other types. Sediments may include: fragments of other rocks that often have been worn down into small pieces, such as sand, silt, or clay. organic materials, or the remains of once-living organisms. chemical precipitates, which are materials that get left behind after the water evaporates from a solution. Rocks at the surface undergo mechanical and chemical weathering. These physical and chemical processes break rock into smaller pieces. Mechanical weathering simply breaks the rocks apart. Chemical weathering dissolves the less stable minerals. These original elements of the minerals end up in solution and new minerals may form. Sediments are removed and transported by water, wind, ice, or gravity in a process called erosion (Figure 1.1). Much more information about weathering and erosion can be found in the chapter Surface Processes and Landforms. Streams carry huge amounts of sediment (Figure 1.2). The more energy the water has, the larger the particle it can carry. A rushing river on a steep slope might be able to carry boulders. As this stream slows down, it no longer has the energy to carry large sediments and will drop them. A slower moving stream will only carry smaller particles. Water erodes the land surface in Alaskas Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes. Sediments are deposited on beaches and deserts, at the bottom of oceans, and in lakes, ponds, rivers, marshes, and swamps. Landslides drop large piles of sediment. Glaciers leave large piles of sediments, too. Wind can only transport sand and smaller particles. The type of sediment that is deposited will determine the type of sedimentary rock that can form. Different colors of sedimentary rock are determined by the environment where they are deposited. Red rocks form where oxygen is present. Darker sediments form when the environment is oxygen poor. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	chemical precipitates are made by fragments of other worn down rocks	false
The energy from earthquakes travels in waves. The study of seismic waves is known as seismology. Seismologists use seismic waves to learn about earthquakes and also to learn about the Earths interior. One ingenious way scientists learn about Earths interior is by looking at earthquake waves. Seismic waves travel outward in all directions from where the ground breaks and are picked up by seismographs around the world. Two types of seismic waves are most useful for learning about Earths interior. 	scientists can learn most everything about earths interior by studying the waves that come into one seismograph	false
By tracking seismic waves, scientists have learned what makes up the planets interior (Figure 1.4). P-waves slow down at the mantle core boundary, so we know the outer core is less rigid than the mantle. S-waves disappear at the mantle core boundary, so we know the outer core is liquid. 	pwaves speed up at the mantle core boundary	false
In a normal year, the trade winds blow across the Pacific Ocean near the Equator from east to west (toward Asia). A low pressure cell rises above the western equatorial Pacific. Warm water in the western Pacific Ocean raises sea levels by half a meter. Along the western coast of South America, the Peru Current carries cold water northward, and then westward along the Equator with the trade winds. Upwelling brings cold, nutrient-rich waters from the deep sea. 	in a normal year the peru current carries cold water north along south america and then across the equator	true
In a La Nia year, as in a normal year, trade winds moves from east to west and warm water piles up in the western Pacific Ocean. Ocean temperatures along coastal South America are colder than normal (instead of warmer, as in El Nio). Cold water reaches farther into the western Pacific than normal. Other important oscillations are smaller and have a local, rather than global, effect. The North Atlantic Oscillation mostly alters climate in Europe. The Mediterranean also goes through cycles, varying between being dry at some times and warm and wet at others. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the north atlantic oscillation mostly alters climate in europe	true
In a normal year, the trade winds blow across the Pacific Ocean near the Equator from east to west (toward Asia). A low pressure cell rises above the western equatorial Pacific. Warm water in the western Pacific Ocean raises sea levels by half a meter. Along the western coast of South America, the Peru Current carries cold water northward, and then westward along the Equator with the trade winds. Upwelling brings cold, nutrient-rich waters from the deep sea. 	warm water in the western pacific ocean decreases sea levels	false
Short-term changes in climate are common and they have many causes (Figure 1.1). The largest and most important of these is the oscillation between El Nio and La Nia conditions. This cycle is called the ENSO (El Nio Southern Oscillation). The ENSO drives changes in climate that are felt around the world about every two to seven years. 	el nio and la nia make a cycle called the los nios oscillation	false
Most of the energy that reaches the Earths surface comes from the Sun (Figure 1.1). About 44% of solar radiation is in the visible light wavelengths, but the Sun also emits infrared, ultraviolet, and other wavelengths. 	sensors can detect wavelengths of energy we cant see and convert them to visible light	true
Most of the energy that reaches the Earths surface comes from the Sun (Figure 1.1). About 44% of solar radiation is in the visible light wavelengths, but the Sun also emits infrared, ultraviolet, and other wavelengths. 	a shorter wavelength means the wave has less energy	false
Of the solar energy that reaches the outer atmosphere, ultraviolet (UV) wavelengths have the greatest energy. Only about 7% of solar radiation is in the UV wavelengths. The three types are: UVC: the highest energy ultraviolet, does not reach the planets surface at all. UVB: the second highest energy, is also mostly stopped in the atmosphere. UVA: the lowest energy, travels through the atmosphere to the ground. 	the only wavelength of energy that are filtered by the atmosphere are uv waves	false
Energy from the Sun comes from the lightest element, hydrogen, fusing together to create the second lightest element, helium. Nuclear fusion on the Sun releases tremendous amounts of solar energy. The energy travels to the Earth, mostly as visible light. The light carries the energy through the empty space between the Sun and the Earth as radiation. 	the southwestern us is a hotspot for solar energy because the region receives a lot of sunlight	true
Energy from the Sun comes from the lightest element, hydrogen, fusing together to create the second lightest element, helium. Nuclear fusion on the Sun releases tremendous amounts of solar energy. The energy travels to the Earth, mostly as visible light. The light carries the energy through the empty space between the Sun and the Earth as radiation. 	in the future cars may be able to run on solar energy	true
Think about how the color of a piece of metal changes with temperature. A coil of an electric stove will start out black, but with added heat will start to glow a dull red. With more heat, the coil turns a brighter red, then orange. At extremely high temperatures the coil will turn yellow-white, or even blue-white (its hard to imagine a stove coil getting that hot). A stars color is also determined by the temperature of the stars surface. Relatively cool stars are red, warmer stars are orange or yellow, and extremely hot stars are blue or blue-white (Figure 1.1). 	orions belt consists of stars that are different colors	true
Think about how the color of a piece of metal changes with temperature. A coil of an electric stove will start out black, but with added heat will start to glow a dull red. With more heat, the coil turns a brighter red, then orange. At extremely high temperatures the coil will turn yellow-white, or even blue-white (its hard to imagine a stove coil getting that hot). A stars color is also determined by the temperature of the stars surface. Relatively cool stars are red, warmer stars are orange or yellow, and extremely hot stars are blue or blue-white (Figure 1.1). 	the brighter the star the larger it is	true
Think about how the color of a piece of metal changes with temperature. A coil of an electric stove will start out black, but with added heat will start to glow a dull red. With more heat, the coil turns a brighter red, then orange. At extremely high temperatures the coil will turn yellow-white, or even blue-white (its hard to imagine a stove coil getting that hot). A stars color is also determined by the temperature of the stars surface. Relatively cool stars are red, warmer stars are orange or yellow, and extremely hot stars are blue or blue-white (Figure 1.1). 	the brightest stars are more than 10000 times brighter than the sun	true
Although the stars in a constellation appear close together as we see them in our night sky, they are not at all close together out in space. In the constellation Orion, the stars visible to the naked eye are at distances ranging from just 26 light-years (which is relatively close to Earth) to several thousand light-years away. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	stars in a constellation appear close together but most are not at all close together in space	true
When you look at the sky on a clear night, you can see dozens, perhaps even hundreds, of tiny points of light. Almost every one of these points of light is a star, a giant ball of glowing gas at a very, very high temperature. Stars differ in size, temperature, and age, but they all appear to be made up of the same elements and to behave according to the same principles. 	babylonian astronomers created the zodiac to explain natural phenomena that we can now explain with science	true
There is no reason to think that the alignment of the stars has anything to do with events that happen on Earth. The constellations were defined by people who noticed that patterns could be made from stars, but the patterns do not reflect any characteristics of the stars themselves. When scientific tests are done to provide evidence in support of astrological ideas, the tests fail. When a scientific idea fails, it is abandoned or modified. Astrologers do not change or abandon their ideas. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the alignment of stars in the sky particularly the patterns of the constellations when a person is born affects events on earth	false
There is no reason to think that the alignment of the stars has anything to do with events that happen on Earth. The constellations were defined by people who noticed that patterns could be made from stars, but the patterns do not reflect any characteristics of the stars themselves. When scientific tests are done to provide evidence in support of astrological ideas, the tests fail. When a scientific idea fails, it is abandoned or modified. Astrologers do not change or abandon their ideas. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	when an idea in astrology fails it is altered or abandoned to fit the new data	false
The Sun is Earths major source of energy, yet the planet only receives a small portion of its energy. The Sun is just an ordinary star. Many stars produce much more energy than the Sun. The energy source for all stars is nuclear fusion. 	only a few stars are made of hydrogen and helium most are made of heavier elements	false
In particle accelerators, subatomic particles are propelled until they have attained almost the same amount of energy as found in the core of a star (Figure 1.3). When these particles collide head-on, new particles are created. This process simulates the nuclear fusion that takes place in the cores of stars. The process also simulates the conditions A diagram of a star like the Sun. that allowed for the first helium atom to be produced from the collision of two hydrogen atoms in the first few minutes of the universe. The SLAC National Accelerator Lab in California can propel particles a straight 2 mi (3.2 km). The CERN Particle Accelerator presented in this video is the worlds largest and most powerful particle accelerator. The accelerator can boost subatomic particles to energy levels that simulate conditions in the stars and in the early history of the universe before stars formed. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	there is only one particle accelerator for scientists to use	false
The Sun is Earths major source of energy, yet the planet only receives a small portion of its energy. The Sun is just an ordinary star. Many stars produce much more energy than the Sun. The energy source for all stars is nuclear fusion. 	the core of a star like the sun is so hot that nuclear fusion takes place	true
The Sun is Earths major source of energy, yet the planet only receives a small portion of its energy. The Sun is just an ordinary star. Many stars produce much more energy than the Sun. The energy source for all stars is nuclear fusion. 	the sun produces more energy than most stars	false
Water is the only substance on Earth that is present in all three states of matter - as a solid, liquid or gas. (And Earth is the only planet where water is abundantly present in all three states.) Because of the ranges in temperature in specific locations around the planet, all three phases may be present in a single location or in a region. The three phases are solid (ice or snow), liquid (water), and gas (water vapor). See ice, water, and clouds (Figure 1.2). (a) Ice floating in the sea. Can you find all three phases of water in this image? (b) Liquid water. (c) Water vapor is invisible, but clouds that form when water vapor condenses are not. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	all three phases of water can be present in a single location	true
Water is the only substance on Earth that is present in all three states of matter - as a solid, liquid or gas. (And Earth is the only planet where water is abundantly present in all three states.) Because of the ranges in temperature in specific locations around the planet, all three phases may be present in a single location or in a region. The three phases are solid (ice or snow), liquid (water), and gas (water vapor). See ice, water, and clouds (Figure 1.2). (a) Ice floating in the sea. Can you find all three phases of water in this image? (b) Liquid water. (c) Water vapor is invisible, but clouds that form when water vapor condenses are not. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	earth is not the only planet that has water in all three states and water is the only substance that is found on earth in all three states	true
There is little mixing between the stratosphere, the layer above the troposphere, and the troposphere below it. The two layers are quite separate. Sometimes ash and gas from a large volcanic eruption may burst into the stratosphere. Once in the stratosphere, it remains suspended there for many years because there is so little mixing between the two layers. 	there is a lot of mixing between the stratosphere and troposphere	false
There is little mixing between the stratosphere, the layer above the troposphere, and the troposphere below it. The two layers are quite separate. Sometimes ash and gas from a large volcanic eruption may burst into the stratosphere. Once in the stratosphere, it remains suspended there for many years because there is so little mixing between the two layers. 	during a volcanic eruption ash and gas may burst into the stratosphere and may remain suspended for many years	true
A stream originates at its source. A source is likely to be in the high mountains where snows collect in winter and melt in summer, or a source might be a spring. A stream may have more than one source. Two streams come together at a confluence. The smaller of the two streams is a tributary of the larger stream (Figure 1.1). The confluence between the Yellowstone River and one of its tributaries, the Gar- diner River, in Montana. The point at which a stream comes into a large body of water, like an ocean or a lake, is called the mouth. Where the stream meets the ocean or lake is an estuary (Figure 1.2). The mouth of the Klamath River creates an estuary where it flows into the Pacific Ocean in California. The mix of fresh and salt water where a river runs into the ocean creates a diversity of environments where many different types of organisms create unique ecosystems. 	a stream only has one source	false
A divide is a topographically high area that separates a landscape into different water basins (Figure 1.6). Rain that falls on the north side of a ridge flows into the northern drainage basin and rain that falls on the south side flows into the southern drainage basin. On a much grander scale, entire continents have divides, known as continental divides. A green floodplain surrounds the Red Rock River as it flows through Montana. (a) The divides of North America. In the Rocky Mountains in Colorado, where does a raindrop falling on the western slope end up? How about on the eastern slope? (b) At Triple Divide Peak in Montana water may flow to the Pacific, the Atlantic, or Hudson Bay depending on where it falls. Can you locate where in the map of North America this peak sits? 	in the united states water that falls on the west side of the continental divide flows into the pacific ocean and on the east side to the atlantic ocean	true
A stream originates at its source. A source is likely to be in the high mountains where snows collect in winter and melt in summer, or a source might be a spring. A stream may have more than one source. Two streams come together at a confluence. The smaller of the two streams is a tributary of the larger stream (Figure 1.1). The confluence between the Yellowstone River and one of its tributaries, the Gar- diner River, in Montana. The point at which a stream comes into a large body of water, like an ocean or a lake, is called the mouth. Where the stream meets the ocean or lake is an estuary (Figure 1.2). The mouth of the Klamath River creates an estuary where it flows into the Pacific Ocean in California. The mix of fresh and salt water where a river runs into the ocean creates a diversity of environments where many different types of organisms create unique ecosystems. 	organisms cannot live where a fresh water stream flows into the salty ocean	false
A supervolcano could change life on Earth as we know it. Ash could block sunlight so much that photosynthesis would be reduced and global temperatures would plummet. Volcanic eruptions could have contributed to some of the mass extinctions in our planets history. No one knows when the next super eruption will be. Interesting volcano videos are seen on National Geographic Videos, Environment Video, Natural Disasters, Earth- quakes: One interesting one is Mammoth Mountain, which explores Hot Creek and the volcanic area it is a part of in California. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	supervolcanoes can cause mass extinctions	true
Supervolcano eruptions are extremely rare in Earths history. Its a good thing because they are unimaginably large. A supervolcano must erupt more than 1,000 cubic km (240 cubic miles) of material, compared with 1.2 km3 for Mount St. Helens or 25 km3 for Mount Pinatubo, a large eruption in the Philippines in 1991. Not surprisingly, supervolcanoes are the most dangerous type of volcano. 	supervolcano eruptions happen somewhere on earth about every 1000 years	false
The exact cause of supervolcano eruptions is still debated. However, scientists think that a very large magma chamber erupts entirely in one catastrophic explosion. This creates a huge hole or caldera into which the surface collapses (Figure 1.1). The caldera at Santorini in Greece is so large that it can only be seen by satellite. 	yellowstone is a supervolcano that has had three massive eruptions	true
Another highly visible feature on the Sun are solar prominences. If plasma flows along a loop of the Suns magnetic field from sunspot to sunspot, it forms a glowing arch that reaches thousands of kilometers into the Suns atmosphere. Prominences can last lengths of time ranging from a day to several months. Prominences are also visible during a total solar eclipse. Most of the imagery comes from SDOs AIA instrument; different colors represent different temperatures, a common technique for observing solar features. SDO sees the entire disk of the Sun in extremely high spatial and temporal resolution, allowing scientists to zoom in on notable events such as flares, waves, and sunspots. 	prominences can last lengths of time ranging from days to months	true
There are other types of interruptions of the Suns magnetic energy. If a loop of the Suns magnetic field snaps and breaks, it creates solar flares, which are violent explosions that release huge amounts of energy (Figure 1.2). A strong solar flare can turn into a coronal mass ejection. A solar flare or coronal mass ejection releases streams of highly energetic particles that make up the solar wind. The solar wind can be dangerous to spacecraft and astronauts because it sends out large amounts of radiation that can harm the human body. Solar flares have knocked out entire power grids and disturbed radio, satellite, and cell phone communications. (a) Sunspots. (b) A close-up of a sunspot taken in ultraviolet light. 	earth is too far away to be affected by solar flares	false
There are other types of interruptions of the Suns magnetic energy. If a loop of the Suns magnetic field snaps and breaks, it creates solar flares, which are violent explosions that release huge amounts of energy (Figure 1.2). A strong solar flare can turn into a coronal mass ejection. A solar flare or coronal mass ejection releases streams of highly energetic particles that make up the solar wind. The solar wind can be dangerous to spacecraft and astronauts because it sends out large amounts of radiation that can harm the human body. Solar flares have knocked out entire power grids and disturbed radio, satellite, and cell phone communications. (a) Sunspots. (b) A close-up of a sunspot taken in ultraviolet light. 	spacecraft and astronauts can be harmed by radiation in space	true
Can society change and get on a sustain- able path? A topic generating a great deal of discussion these days is sustainable development. The goals of sustainable development are to: help people out of poverty. protect the environment. use resources no faster than the rate at which they are regenerated. Science can be an important part of sustainable development. When scientists understand how Earths natural systems work, they can recognize how people are impacting them. Scientists can work to develop technologies that can be used to solve problems wisely. An example of a practice that can aid sustainable development is fish farming, as long as it is done in environmentally sound ways. Engineers can develop cleaner energy sources to reduce pollution and greenhouse gas emissions. Citizens can change their behavior to reduce the impact they have on the planet by demanding products that are produced sustainably. When forests are logged, new trees should be planted. Mining should be done so that the landscape is not destroyed. People can consume less and think more about the impacts of what they do consume. And what of the waste products of society? Will producing all that we need to keep the population growing result in a planet so polluted that the quality of life will be greatly diminished? Will warming temperatures cause problems for human populations? The only answer to all of these questions is, time will tell. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	for a more sustainable future human population should be reduced	true
Can society change and get on a sustain- able path? A topic generating a great deal of discussion these days is sustainable development. The goals of sustainable development are to: help people out of poverty. protect the environment. use resources no faster than the rate at which they are regenerated. Science can be an important part of sustainable development. When scientists understand how Earths natural systems work, they can recognize how people are impacting them. Scientists can work to develop technologies that can be used to solve problems wisely. An example of a practice that can aid sustainable development is fish farming, as long as it is done in environmentally sound ways. Engineers can develop cleaner energy sources to reduce pollution and greenhouse gas emissions. Citizens can change their behavior to reduce the impact they have on the planet by demanding products that are produced sustainably. When forests are logged, new trees should be planted. Mining should be done so that the landscape is not destroyed. People can consume less and think more about the impacts of what they do consume. And what of the waste products of society? Will producing all that we need to keep the population growing result in a planet so polluted that the quality of life will be greatly diminished? Will warming temperatures cause problems for human populations? The only answer to all of these questions is, time will tell. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	in order to create a more sustainable environment we need to use resources faster than they are regenerated	false
Can society change and get on a sustain- able path? A topic generating a great deal of discussion these days is sustainable development. The goals of sustainable development are to: help people out of poverty. protect the environment. use resources no faster than the rate at which they are regenerated. Science can be an important part of sustainable development. When scientists understand how Earths natural systems work, they can recognize how people are impacting them. Scientists can work to develop technologies that can be used to solve problems wisely. An example of a practice that can aid sustainable development is fish farming, as long as it is done in environmentally sound ways. Engineers can develop cleaner energy sources to reduce pollution and greenhouse gas emissions. Citizens can change their behavior to reduce the impact they have on the planet by demanding products that are produced sustainably. When forests are logged, new trees should be planted. Mining should be done so that the landscape is not destroyed. People can consume less and think more about the impacts of what they do consume. And what of the waste products of society? Will producing all that we need to keep the population growing result in a planet so polluted that the quality of life will be greatly diminished? Will warming temperatures cause problems for human populations? The only answer to all of these questions is, time will tell. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	sustainable development is only concerned with protecting the environment	false
Can society change and get on a sustain- able path? A topic generating a great deal of discussion these days is sustainable development. The goals of sustainable development are to: help people out of poverty. protect the environment. use resources no faster than the rate at which they are regenerated. Science can be an important part of sustainable development. When scientists understand how Earths natural systems work, they can recognize how people are impacting them. Scientists can work to develop technologies that can be used to solve problems wisely. An example of a practice that can aid sustainable development is fish farming, as long as it is done in environmentally sound ways. Engineers can develop cleaner energy sources to reduce pollution and greenhouse gas emissions. Citizens can change their behavior to reduce the impact they have on the planet by demanding products that are produced sustainably. When forests are logged, new trees should be planted. Mining should be done so that the landscape is not destroyed. People can consume less and think more about the impacts of what they do consume. And what of the waste products of society? Will producing all that we need to keep the population growing result in a planet so polluted that the quality of life will be greatly diminished? Will warming temperatures cause problems for human populations? The only answer to all of these questions is, time will tell. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	to help society become more sustainable every individual should consume less and think about the impacts of what they consume	true
Hypothesis 2 states that the increase in atmospheric CO2 is due to the increase in the amount of fossil fuels that are being burned. We look into the scientific literature and find this graph in the Figure 1.1. Global carbon dioxide emissions from fos- sil fuel consumption and cement produc- tion. The black line represents all emis- sion types combined, and colored lines show emissions from individual fossil fu- els. Fossil fuels have added an increasing amount of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution in the mid 19th century. Hypothesis 2 is true! Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	one of the reasons for the increase in carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is due to the increase in the amount of fossil fuels used	true
How do you test a hypothesis? In this example, we will look into the scientific literature to find data in studies that were done using scientific method. To test Hypothesis 1 from the concept "Development of Hypotheses," we need to see if the amount of CO2 gas released by volcanoes over the past several decades has increased. There are two ways volcanoes could account for the increase in CO2 : There has been an increase in volcanic eruptions in that time. The CO2 content of volcanic gases has increased over time globally. To test the first hypothesis, we look at the scientific literature. We see that the number of volcanic eruptions is about constant. We also learn from the scientific literature that volcanic gas compositions have not changed over time. Different types of volcanoes have different gas compositions, but overall the gases are the same. Another journal article states that major volcanic eruptions for the past 30 years have caused short-term cooling, not warming! Hypothesis 1 is wrong! Volcanic activity is not able to account for the rise in atmospheric CO2 . Remember that science is falsifiable. We can discard Hypothesis 1. 	data are facts that have been uncovered from the scientific literature or by systematic observations or experiments	true
How do you test a hypothesis? In this example, we will look into the scientific literature to find data in studies that were done using scientific method. To test Hypothesis 1 from the concept "Development of Hypotheses," we need to see if the amount of CO2 gas released by volcanoes over the past several decades has increased. There are two ways volcanoes could account for the increase in CO2 : There has been an increase in volcanic eruptions in that time. The CO2 content of volcanic gases has increased over time globally. To test the first hypothesis, we look at the scientific literature. We see that the number of volcanic eruptions is about constant. We also learn from the scientific literature that volcanic gas compositions have not changed over time. Different types of volcanoes have different gas compositions, but overall the gases are the same. Another journal article states that major volcanic eruptions for the past 30 years have caused short-term cooling, not warming! Hypothesis 1 is wrong! Volcanic activity is not able to account for the rise in atmospheric CO2 . Remember that science is falsifiable. We can discard Hypothesis 1. 	having multiple working hypotheses helps in investigating a question	true
There is no real outer limit to the exosphere, the outermost layer of the atmosphere; the gas molecules finally become so scarce that at some point there are no more. Beyond the atmosphere is the solar wind. The solar wind is made of high-speed particles, mostly protons and electrons, traveling rapidly outward from the Sun. 	perhaps the most important feature of the outermost layers of the atmosphere is the low density of the gas particles	true
When massive solar storms cause the Van Allen belts to become overloaded with particles, the result is the most spectacular feature of the ionosphere  the nighttime aurora (Figure 1.1). The particles spiral along magnetic field lines toward the poles. The charged particles energize oxygen and nitrogen gas molecules, causing them to light up. Each gas emits a particular color of light. (a) Spectacular light displays are visible as the aurora borealis or northern lights in the Northern Hemisphere. (b) The aurora australis or southern lights encircles Antarctica. What would Earths magnetic field look like if it were painted in colors? It would look like the aurora! This QUEST video looks at the aurora, which provides clues about the solar wind, Earths magnetic field and Earths atmosphere. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the aurora occur during massive solar storms when the van allen belts are overloaded with particles	true
Tides are the daily rise and fall of sea level at any given place. The pull of the Moons gravity on Earth is the primary cause of tides and the pull of the Suns gravity on Earth is the secondary cause (Figure 1.1). The Moon has a greater effect because, although it is much smaller than the Sun, it is much closer. The Moons pull is about twice that of the Suns. To understand the tides it is easiest to start with the effect of the Moon on Earth. As the Moon revolves around our planet, its gravity pulls Earth toward it. The lithosphere is unable to move much, but the water is pulled by the gravity and a bulge is created. This bulge is the high tide beneath the Moon. On the other side of the Earth, a high tide is produced where the Moons pull is weakest. These two water bulges on opposite sides of the Earth aligned with the Moon are the high tides. The places directly in between the high tides are low tides. As the Earth rotates beneath the Moon, a single spot will experience two high tides and two low tides approximately every day. High tides occur about every 12 hours and 25 minutes. The reason is that the Moon takes 24 hours and 50 minutes to rotate once around the Earth, so the Moon is over the same location every 24 hours and 50 minutes. Since high tides occur twice a day, one arrives each 12 hours and 25 minutes. What is the time between a high tide and the next low tide? The gravity of the Sun also pulls Earths water towards it and causes its own tides. Because the Sun is so far away, its pull is smaller than the Moons. Some coastal areas do not follow this pattern at all. These coastal areas may have one high and one low tide per day or a different amount of time between two high tides. These differences are often because of local conditions, such as the shape of the coastline that the tide is entering. The gravitational attraction of the Moon to ocean water creates the high and low tides. 	when two water bulges on opposite sides of the earth aligned with the moon they are called low tides	false
The tidal range is the difference between the ocean level at high tide and the ocean level at low tide (Figure 1.2). The tidal range in a location depends on a number of factors, including the slope of the seafloor. Water appears to move a greater distance on a gentle slope than on a steep slope. 	there is only one high and one low tide a day	false
If you look at the diagram of high and low tides on a circular Earth above, youll see that tides are waves. So when the Sun and Moon are aligned, what do you expect the tides to look like? Waves are additive, so when the gravitational pull of both bodies is in the same direction, the high tides are higher and the low tides lower than at other times through the month (Figure 1.3). These more extreme tides, with a greater tidal range, are called spring tides. Spring tides dont just occur in the spring; they occur whenever the Moon is in a new-moon or full-moon phase, about every 14 days. Neap tides are tides that have the smallest tidal range, and they occur when the Earth, the Moon, and the Sun form a 90o angle (Figure 1.4). They occur exactly halfway between the spring tides, when the Moon is at first or last quarter. How do the tides add up to create neap tides? The Moons high tide occurs in the same place as the Suns low tide and the Moons low tide in the same place as the Suns high tide. At neap tides, the tidal range is relatively small. The tidal range is the difference between the ocean level at high tide and low tide. Studying ocean tides rhythmic movements helps scientists understand the ocean and the Sun/Moon/Earth system. This QUEST video explains how tides work, and visits the oldest continually operating tidal gauge in the Western Hemisphere. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	tides like other waves are additive	true
In locations where summers are warm and winters are cool, trees have a distinctive growth pattern. Tree trunks display alternating bands of light-colored, low density summer growth and dark, high density winter growth. Each light-dark band represents one year. By counting tree rings it is possible to find the number of years the tree lived (Figure 1.1). The width of these growth rings varies with the conditions present that year. A summer drought may make the tree grow more slowly than normal and so its light band will be relatively small. These tree-ring variations appear in all trees in a region. The same distinctive pattern can be found in all the trees in an area for the same time period. Scientists have created continuous records of tree rings going back over the past 2,000 years. Wood fragments from old buildings and ancient ruins can be age dated by matching up the pattern of tree rings in the wood fragment in Cross-section showing growth rings. question and the scale created by scientists. The outermost ring indicates when the tree stopped growing; that is, when it died. The tree-ring record is extremely useful for finding the age of ancient structures. 	tree trunks alternating bands of lightcolored high density summer growth and lowdensity winter growth	false
Besides tree rings, other processes create distinct yearly layers that can be used for dating. On a glacier, snow falls in winter but in summer dust accumulates. This leads to a snow-dust annual pattern that goes down into the ice (Figure gather allows them to determine how the environment has changed as the glacier has stayed in its position. Analyses of the ice tell how concentrations of atmospheric gases changed, which can yield clues about climate. The longest cores allow scientists to create a record of polar climate stretching back hundreds of thousands of years. 	ice cores show that snow falls in winter but in summer dust accumulates	true
Lake sediments, especially in lakes that are located at the end of glaciers, also have an annual pattern. In the summer, the glacier melts rapidly, producing a thick deposit of sediment. These alternate with thin, clay-rich layers deposited in the winter. The resulting layers, called varves, give scientists clues about past climate conditions (Figure 1.3). A warm summer might result in a very thick sediment layer while a cooler summer might yield a thinner layer. 	a cold year is indicated in a varve by a thick deposit of sediment	false
Besides tree rings, other processes create distinct yearly layers that can be used for dating. On a glacier, snow falls in winter but in summer dust accumulates. This leads to a snow-dust annual pattern that goes down into the ice (Figure gather allows them to determine how the environment has changed as the glacier has stayed in its position. Analyses of the ice tell how concentrations of atmospheric gases changed, which can yield clues about climate. The longest cores allow scientists to create a record of polar climate stretching back hundreds of thousands of years. 	an ice core can reveal the climate in the region for hundreds of thousands of years	true
Sometimes there is a temperature inversion, in which air temperature in the troposphere increases with altitude and warm air sits over cold air. Inversions are very stable and may last for several days or even weeks. Inversions form: Over land at night or in winter when the ground is cold. The cold ground cools the air that sits above it, making this low layer of air denser than the air above it. Near the coast, where cold seawater cools the air above it. When that denser air moves inland, it slides beneath the warmer air over the land. Since temperature inversions are stable, they often trap pollutants and produce unhealthy air conditions in cities (Figure 1.1). Smoke makes a temperature inversion visible. The smoke is trapped in cold dense air that lies beneath a cap of warmer air. At the top of the troposphere is a thin layer in which the temperature does not change with height. This means that the cooler, denser air of the troposphere is trapped beneath the warmer, less dense air of the stratosphere. Air from the troposphere and stratosphere rarely mix. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	inversions are very stable and may last for several days or even weeks	true
Sometimes there is a temperature inversion, in which air temperature in the troposphere increases with altitude and warm air sits over cold air. Inversions are very stable and may last for several days or even weeks. Inversions form: Over land at night or in winter when the ground is cold. The cold ground cools the air that sits above it, making this low layer of air denser than the air above it. Near the coast, where cold seawater cools the air above it. When that denser air moves inland, it slides beneath the warmer air over the land. Since temperature inversions are stable, they often trap pollutants and produce unhealthy air conditions in cities (Figure 1.1). Smoke makes a temperature inversion visible. The smoke is trapped in cold dense air that lies beneath a cap of warmer air. At the top of the troposphere is a thin layer in which the temperature does not change with height. This means that the cooler, denser air of the troposphere is trapped beneath the warmer, less dense air of the stratosphere. Air from the troposphere and stratosphere rarely mix. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	air from the troposphere and stratosphere commonly mix	false
Tsunami are deadly ocean waves from the sharp jolt of an undersea earthquake. Less frequently, these waves can be generated by other shocks to the sea, like a meteorite impact. Fortunately, few undersea earthquakes, and even fewer meteorite impacts, generate tsunami. 	a ship at sea will probably not know when a tsunami passes beneath it	true
Tsunami waves have small wave heights relative to their long wavelengths, so they are usually unnoticed at sea. When traveling up a slope onto a shoreline, the wave is pushed upward. As with wind waves, the speed of the bottom of the wave is slowed by friction. This causes the wavelength to decrease and the wave to become unstable. These factors can create an enormous and deadly wave. Landslides, meteorite impacts, or any other jolt to ocean water may form a tsunami. Tsunami can travel at speeds of 800 kilometers per hour (500 miles per hour). 	tsunami have high wave heights and short wavelengths	false
Tsunami are deadly ocean waves from the sharp jolt of an undersea earthquake. Less frequently, these waves can be generated by other shocks to the sea, like a meteorite impact. Fortunately, few undersea earthquakes, and even fewer meteorite impacts, generate tsunami. 	tsunami warnings have been placed where tsunamis are possible	true
Tsunami waves have small wave heights relative to their long wavelengths, so they are usually unnoticed at sea. When traveling up a slope onto a shoreline, the wave is pushed upward. As with wind waves, the speed of the bottom of the wave is slowed by friction. This causes the wavelength to decrease and the wave to become unstable. These factors can create an enormous and deadly wave. Landslides, meteorite impacts, or any other jolt to ocean water may form a tsunami. Tsunami can travel at speeds of 800 kilometers per hour (500 miles per hour). 	you would be more likely to drown in a tsunami in a flat region than on a steep beach because the wave could travel farther inland and you couldnt outrun it	true
Some primary pollutants are natural, such as volcanic ash. Dust is natural but exacerbated by human activities; for example, when the ground is torn up for agriculture or development. Most primary pollutants are the result of human activities, the direct emissions from vehicles and smokestacks. Primary pollutants include: Carbon oxides include carbon monoxide (CO) and carbon dioxide (CO2 ) (Figure 1.1). Both are colorless, odorless gases. CO is toxic to both plants and animals. CO and CO2 are both greenhouse gases. Nitrogen oxides are produced when nitrogen and oxygen from the atmosphere come together at high temper- atures. This occurs in hot exhaust gas from vehicles, power plants, or factories. Nitrogen oxide (NO) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2 ) are greenhouse gases. Nitrogen oxides contribute to acid rain. Sulfur oxides include sulfur dioxide (SO2 ) and sulfur trioxide (SO3 ). These form when sulfur from burning coal reaches the air. Sulfur oxides are components of acid rain. Particulates are solid particles, such as ash, dust, and fecal matter (Figure 1.2). They are commonly formed from combustion of fossil fuels, and can produce smog. Particulates can contribute to asthma, heart disease, and some types of cancers. Lead was once widely used in automobile fuels, paint, and pipes. This heavy metal can cause brain damage or blood poisoning. High CO2 levels are found in major metropolitan areas and along the major interstate highways. Particulates from a brush fire give the sky a strange glow in Arizona. 	dust is a natural air pollutant that is increased by human activities	true
The two types of air pollutants are primary pollutants, which enter the atmosphere directly, and secondary pollutants, which form from a chemical reaction. 	all air pollutants except particulates are brownish gases	false
The two types of air pollutants are primary pollutants, which enter the atmosphere directly, and secondary pollutants, which form from a chemical reaction. 	secondary pollutants are most common in warm arid cities surrounded by mountains	true
The most common method of fossilization is permineralization. After a bone, wood fragment, or shell is buried in sediment, mineral-rich water moves through the sediment. This water deposits minerals into empty spaces and Five types of fossils: (a) insect preserved in amber, (b) petrified wood (permineralization), (c) cast and mold of a clam shell, (d) pyritized ammonite, and (e) compression fossil of a fern. produces a fossil. Fossil dinosaur bones, petrified wood, and many marine fossils were formed by permineralization. 	permineralization is the most common method of fossilization	true
The most common method of fossilization is permineralization. After a bone, wood fragment, or shell is buried in sediment, mineral-rich water moves through the sediment. This water deposits minerals into empty spaces and Five types of fossils: (a) insect preserved in amber, (b) petrified wood (permineralization), (c) cast and mold of a clam shell, (d) pyritized ammonite, and (e) compression fossil of a fern. produces a fossil. Fossil dinosaur bones, petrified wood, and many marine fossils were formed by permineralization. 	a large mammal fossil that is complete must have formed in exceptional circumstances	true
Most fossils are preserved by one of five processes outlined below (Figure 1.1): 	there are many fossils of bacteria and jellyfish	false
What did the ancient Greeks recognize as the universe? In their model, the universe contained Earth at the center, the Sun, the Moon, five planets, and a sphere to which all the stars were attached. This idea held for many centuries until Galileos telescope helped people recognize that Earth is not the center of the universe. They also found out that there are many more stars than were visible to the naked eye. All of those stars were in the Milky Way Galaxy. In the early 20th century, an astronomer named Edwin Hubble (Figure 1.1) discovered that what scientists called the Andromeda Nebula was actually over 2 million light years away  many times farther than the farthest distances that had ever been measured. Hubble realized that many of the objects that astronomers called nebulas were not actually clouds of gas, but were collections of millions or billions of stars  what we now call galaxies. Hubble showed that the universe was much larger than our own galaxy. Today, we know that the universe contains about a hundred billion galaxies  about the same number of galaxies as there are stars in the Milky Way Galaxy. (a) Edwin Hubble used the 100-inch reflecting telescope at the Mount Wilson Observatory in California to show that some distant specks of light were galaxies. (b) Hubbles namesake space telescope spotted this six galaxy group. Edwin Hubble demonstrated the existence of galaxies. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	galileos telescope revealed galaxies that were not visible with the naked eye	false
The study of the universe is called cosmology. Cosmologists study the structure and changes in the present universe. The universe contains all of the star systems, galaxies, gas, and dust, plus all the matter and energy that exists now, that existed in the past, and that will exist in the future. The universe includes all of space and time. 	during the time of galileo most people thought that earth was the center of the universe	true
The study of the universe is called cosmology. Cosmologists study the structure and changes in the present universe. The universe contains all of the star systems, galaxies, gas, and dust, plus all the matter and energy that exists now, that existed in the past, and that will exist in the future. The universe includes all of space and time. 	astronomers think that the universe contains about 100 billion galaxies	true
Most of the planets in the solar system rotate on their axes in the same direction that they move around the Sun. Uranus, though, is tilted on its side, so its axis is almost parallel to its orbit. In other words, it rotates like a top that was turned so that it was spinning parallel to the floor. Scientists think that Uranus was probably knocked over by a collision with another planet-sized object billions of years ago. 	if your grandfather is 73 years old he has been alive for one year on uranus	false
Uranus (YOOR-uh-nuhs) is named for the Greek god of the sky. From Earth, Uranus is so faint that it was unnoticed by ancient observers. William Herschel first discovered the planet in 1781. Although Uranus is very large, it is extremely far away, about 2.8 billion km (1.8 billion mi) from the Sun. Light from the Sun takes about 2 hours and 40 minutes to reach Uranus. Uranus orbits the Sun once about every 84 Earth years. Uranus has a mass about 14 times the mass of Earth, but it is much less dense than Earth. Gravity at the surface of Uranus is weaker than on Earths surface, so if you were at the top of the clouds on Uranus, you would weigh about 10% less than what you weigh on Earth. 	gravity is stronger on uranus than earth	false
Most of the planets in the solar system rotate on their axes in the same direction that they move around the Sun. Uranus, though, is tilted on its side, so its axis is almost parallel to its orbit. In other words, it rotates like a top that was turned so that it was spinning parallel to the floor. Scientists think that Uranus was probably knocked over by a collision with another planet-sized object billions of years ago. 	uranus may have been hit by struck by an enormous object billions of years ago	true
Industrial water use accounts for an estimated 15% of worldwide water use, with a much greater percentage in developed nations. Industrial uses of water include power plants that use water to cool their equipment and oil refineries that use water for chemical processes. Manufacturing is also water intensive. 	industrial water use includes using water for cooling but not using up the water	true
For some species, aquaculture is very successful and environmental harm is minimal. But for other species, aqua- culture can cause problems. Natural landscapes, such as mangroves, which are rich ecosystems and also protect coastlines from storm damage, may be lost to fish farms (Figure 1.4). For fish farmers, keeping costs down may be a problem since coastal land may be expensive and labor costs may be high. Large predatory fish at the 4th or 5th trophic level must eat a lot, so feeding large numbers of these fish is expensive and environmentally costly. Farmed fish are genetically different from wild stocks, and if they escape into the wild they may cause problems for native fish. Because the organisms live so close together, parasites are common and may also escape into the wild. Shrimp farms on the coast of Ecuador are shown as blue rectangles. Mangrove forests, salt flats, and salt marshes have been converted to shrimp farms. 	aquaculture of some species provides a lot of food value at little environmental cost	true
Venus is covered by a thick layer of clouds, as shown in pictures of Venus taken at ultraviolet wavelengths (Figure This ultraviolet image from the Pioneer Venus Orbiter shows thick layers of clouds in the atmosphere of Venus. Venus clouds are not made of water vapor like Earths clouds. Clouds on Venus are made mostly of carbon dioxide Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  The atmosphere of Venus is so thick that the atmospheric pressure on the planets surface is 90 times greater than the atmospheric pressure on Earths surface. The dense atmosphere totally obscures the surface of Venus, even from spacecraft orbiting the planet. 	scientists could learn a lot about the surface of venus through telescopes since the planet is so close	false
Venus rotates in a direction opposite the other planets and opposite to the direction it orbits the Sun. This rotation is extremely slow, only one turn every 243 Earth days. This is longer than a year on Venus  it takes Venus only 224 days to orbit the Sun. Diagram of Venuss interior, which is simi- lar to Earths. 	venus has extremely high atmospheric pressure and an intense greenhouse effect	true
Venus is covered by a thick layer of clouds, as shown in pictures of Venus taken at ultraviolet wavelengths (Figure This ultraviolet image from the Pioneer Venus Orbiter shows thick layers of clouds in the atmosphere of Venus. Venus clouds are not made of water vapor like Earths clouds. Clouds on Venus are made mostly of carbon dioxide Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  The atmosphere of Venus is so thick that the atmospheric pressure on the planets surface is 90 times greater than the atmospheric pressure on Earths surface. The dense atmosphere totally obscures the surface of Venus, even from spacecraft orbiting the planet. 	venus is the 2nd hottest planet in the solar system after mercury	false
Water scarcity can have dire consequences for the people, the economy, and the environment. Without adequate water, crops and livestock dwindle and people go hungry. Industry, construction, and economic development is halted, causing a nation to sink further into poverty. The risk of regional conflicts over scarce water resources rises. People die from diseases, thirst, or even in war over scarce resources. Californias population is growing by hundreds of thousands of people a year, but much of the state receives as much annual rainfall as Morocco. With fish populations crashing, global warming, and the demands of the countrys largest agricultural industry, the pressures on our water supply are increasing. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the central valley of california is a lush agricultural area because it receives a lot of rain	false
Global warming will change patterns of rainfall and water distribution. As the Earth warms, regions that currently receive an adequate supply of rain may shift. Regions that rely on snowmelt may find that there is less snow and the melt comes earlier and faster in the spring, causing the water to run off and not be available through the dry summers. A change in temperature and precipitation would completely change the types of plants and animals that can live successfully in that region. 	a change in temperature and precipitation would completely change the types of plants and animals in a region	true
Global warming will change patterns of rainfall and water distribution. As the Earth warms, regions that currently receive an adequate supply of rain may shift. Regions that rely on snowmelt may find that there is less snow and the melt comes earlier and faster in the spring, causing the water to run off and not be available through the dry summers. A change in temperature and precipitation would completely change the types of plants and animals that can live successfully in that region. 	some regions receive a considerable amount of rain but have an annual drought of several months each year	true
As water supplies become scarce, conflicts will arise between the individuals or nations that have enough clean water and those that do not (Figure 1.3). Some of todays greatest tensions are happening in places where water is scarce. Water disputes may add to tensions between countries where differing national interests and withdrawal rights have been in conflict. Just as with energy resources today, wars may erupt over water. Water disputes are happening along 260 different river systems that cross national boundaries. Some of these disputes are potentially very serious. International water laws, such as the Helsinki Rules, help interpret water rights among countries. Many regions already experience water scarcity. This map shows the number of months in which the amount of water that is used exceeds the availability of water that can be used sustainably. This is projected to get worse as demand increases. 	water disputes are easily solved using the helsinki rules	false
Water pollution contributes to water shortages by making some water sources unavailable for use. In underdeveloped countries, raw sewage is dumped into the same water that people drink and bathe in. Even in developed countries, water pollution affects human and environmental health. Water pollution includes any contaminant that gets into lakes, streams, and oceans. The most widespread source of water contamination in developing countries is raw sewage. In developed countries, the three main sources of water pollution are described below. 	in some underdeveloped countries raw sewage is dumped into the same water where people drink and bathe	true
Water pollution contributes to water shortages by making some water sources unavailable for use. In underdeveloped countries, raw sewage is dumped into the same water that people drink and bathe in. Even in developed countries, water pollution affects human and environmental health. Water pollution includes any contaminant that gets into lakes, streams, and oceans. The most widespread source of water contamination in developing countries is raw sewage. In developed countries, the three main sources of water pollution are described below. 	water pollution is not a problem in developed nations	false
Water pollution contributes to water shortages by making some water sources unavailable for use. In underdeveloped countries, raw sewage is dumped into the same water that people drink and bathe in. Even in developed countries, water pollution affects human and environmental health. Water pollution includes any contaminant that gets into lakes, streams, and oceans. The most widespread source of water contamination in developing countries is raw sewage. In developed countries, the three main sources of water pollution are described below. 	in the united states sewage that enters water bodies is always decontaminated and cleaned up	false
No human being can watch for millions of years as mountains are built, nor can anyone watch as those same mountains gradually are worn away. But imagine a new sidewalk or road. The new road is smooth and even. Over hundreds of years, it will completely disappear, but what happens over one year? What changes would you see? (Figure 1.1). What forces of weathering wear down that road, or rocks or mountains over time? A once smooth road surface has cracks and fractures, plus a large pothole. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	weathering happens rapidly often in a matter of years or decades	false
Weathering is the process that changes solid rock into sediments. Sediments were described in the chapter "Ma- terials of Earths Crust." With weathering, rock is disintegrated. It breaks into pieces. Once these sediments are separated from the rocks, erosion is the process that moves the sediments. While plate tectonics forces work to build huge mountains and other landscapes, the forces of weathering gradually wear those rocks and landscapes away. Together with erosion, tall mountains turn into hills and even plains. The Appalachian Mountains along the east coast of North America were once as tall as the Himalayas. 	the appalachians were once as tall as the himalayas and have since weathered and eroded	true
Weathering is the process that changes solid rock into sediments. Sediments were described in the chapter "Ma- terials of Earths Crust." With weathering, rock is disintegrated. It breaks into pieces. Once these sediments are separated from the rocks, erosion is the process that moves the sediments. While plate tectonics forces work to build huge mountains and other landscapes, the forces of weathering gradually wear those rocks and landscapes away. Together with erosion, tall mountains turn into hills and even plains. The Appalachian Mountains along the east coast of North America were once as tall as the Himalayas. 	weathering and erosion can change land over time	true
No human being can watch for millions of years as mountains are built, nor can anyone watch as those same mountains gradually are worn away. But imagine a new sidewalk or road. The new road is smooth and even. Over hundreds of years, it will completely disappear, but what happens over one year? What changes would you see? (Figure 1.1). What forces of weathering wear down that road, or rocks or mountains over time? A once smooth road surface has cracks and fractures, plus a large pothole. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	weathering can change roads sidewalks buildings and sculptures over time	true
Wegener put his idea and his evidence together in his book The Origin of Continents and Oceans, first published in 1915. New editions with additional evidence were published later in the decade. In his book he said that around 300 million years ago the continents had all been joined into a single landmass he called Pangaea, meaning all earth in ancient Greek. The supercontinent later broke apart and the continents having been moving into their current positions ever since. He called his hypothesis continental drift. 	many of the best scientists of the day agreed with wegeners hypothesis even though he did not have a plausible mechanism for continental movement	false
Wegener had many thoughts regarding what could be the driving force behind continental drift. Another of We- geners colleagues, Arthur Holmes, elaborated on Wegeners idea that there is thermal convection in the mantle. In a convection cell, material deep beneath the surface is heated so that its density is lowered and it rises. Near the surface it becomes cooler and denser, so it sinks. Holmes thought this could be like a conveyor belt. Where two adjacent convection cells rise to the surface, a continent could break apart with pieces moving in opposite directions. Although this sounds like a great idea, there was no real evidence for it, either. Alfred Wegener died in 1930 on an expedition on the Greenland icecap. For the most part the continental drift idea was put to rest for a few decades, until technological advances presented even more evidence that the continents moved and gave scientists the tools to develop a mechanism for Wegeners drifting continents. Since youre on a virtual field trip, you get to go along with them as well. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the heat source for plate motions is the mantle	false
Wegener had many thoughts regarding what could be the driving force behind continental drift. Another of We- geners colleagues, Arthur Holmes, elaborated on Wegeners idea that there is thermal convection in the mantle. In a convection cell, material deep beneath the surface is heated so that its density is lowered and it rises. Near the surface it becomes cooler and denser, so it sinks. Holmes thought this could be like a conveyor belt. Where two adjacent convection cells rise to the surface, a continent could break apart with pieces moving in opposite directions. Although this sounds like a great idea, there was no real evidence for it, either. Alfred Wegener died in 1930 on an expedition on the Greenland icecap. For the most part the continental drift idea was put to rest for a few decades, until technological advances presented even more evidence that the continents moved and gave scientists the tools to develop a mechanism for Wegeners drifting continents. Since youre on a virtual field trip, you get to go along with them as well. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	where two adjacent convection cells rise to the surface a continent could break apart and the pieces could move in the opposite direction	true
Wegener put his idea and his evidence together in his book The Origin of Continents and Oceans, first published in 1915. New editions with additional evidence were published later in the decade. In his book he said that around 300 million years ago the continents had all been joined into a single landmass he called Pangaea, meaning all earth in ancient Greek. The supercontinent later broke apart and the continents having been moving into their current positions ever since. He called his hypothesis continental drift. 	the hypothesis of continental drift was ignored until new evidence was found that pointed to a mechanism	true
When does a wave break? Do waves only break when they reach shore? Waves break when they become too tall to be supported by their base. This can happen at sea but happens predictably as a wave moves up a shore. The energy at the bottom of the wave is lost by friction with the ground, so that the bottom of the wave slows down but the top of the wave continues at the same speed. The crest falls over and crashes down. 	waves break when they become too tall to be supported by their base	true
Water molecules in waves make circles or ellipses (Figure 1.1). Energy transfers between molecules, but the molecules themselves mostly bob up and down in place. The circles show the motion of a water molecule in a wind wave. Wave energy is greatest at the surface and decreases with depth. "A" shows that a water molecule travels in a circular motion in deep water. "B" shows that molecules in shallow water travel in an elliptical path because of the ocean bottom. 	wave energy is lowest at the surface and increases with depth	false
When does a wave break? Do waves only break when they reach shore? Waves break when they become too tall to be supported by their base. This can happen at sea but happens predictably as a wave moves up a shore. The energy at the bottom of the wave is lost by friction with the ground, so that the bottom of the wave slows down but the top of the wave continues at the same speed. The crest falls over and crashes down. 	the energy contained in bottom of the wave is reduced due to friction with the shore	true
Waves have been discussed in previous concepts in several contexts: seismic waves traveling through the planet, sound waves traveling through seawater, and ocean waves eroding beaches. Waves transfer energy, and the size of a wave and the distance it travels depends on the amount of energy that it carries. This concept studies the most familiar waves, those on the oceans surface. 	the water in a wave travels across the ocean to end up on a shoreline	false
The microscope was invented more than four centuries ago. In the late 1500s, two Dutch eyeglass makers, Zacharias Jansen and his father Hans, built the first microscope. They put several magnifying lenses in a tube. They discovered that using more than one lens magnified objects more than a single lens. Their simple microscope could make small objects appear nine times bigger than they really were. 	the microscope was invented in the late 1800s	false
In the late 1600s, Anton van Leeuwenhoek, a Dutch lens maker and scientist, started making much stronger microscopes. His microscopes could magnify objects as much as 270 times their actual size. Van Leeuwenhoek made many scientific discoveries using his microscopes. He was the first to see and describe bacteria. He observed them in a sample of plaque that he had scraped off his own teeth. He also saw yeast cells, human sperm cells, and the microscopic life teeming in a drop of pond water. He even saw blood cells circulating in tiny blood vessels called capillaries. The drawings in Figure 1.12 show some of tiny organisms and living cells that van Leeuwenhoek viewed with his microscopes. He called them animalcules. 	the earliest microscopes were light microscopes	true
Many life science discoveries would not have been possible without the microscope. For example: Cells are the tiny building blocks of living things. They couldnt be discovered until the microscope was invented. The discovery of cells led to the cell theory. This is one of the most important theories in life science. Bacteria are among the most numerous living things on the planet. They also cause many diseases. However, no one knew bacteria even existed until they could be seen with a microscope. The invention of the microscope allowed scientists to see cells, bacteria, and many other structures that are too small to be seen with the unaided eye. It gave them a direct view into the unseen world of the extremely tiny. You can get a glimpse of that world in Figure 1.10. 	an individual bacterial cell is invisible without a microscope	true
Many life science discoveries would not have been possible without the microscope. For example: Cells are the tiny building blocks of living things. They couldnt be discovered until the microscope was invented. The discovery of cells led to the cell theory. This is one of the most important theories in life science. Bacteria are among the most numerous living things on the planet. They also cause many diseases. However, no one knew bacteria even existed until they could be seen with a microscope. The invention of the microscope allowed scientists to see cells, bacteria, and many other structures that are too small to be seen with the unaided eye. It gave them a direct view into the unseen world of the extremely tiny. You can get a glimpse of that world in Figure 1.10. 	many life science discoveries would not have been possible without the microscope	true
The microscope was invented more than four centuries ago. In the late 1500s, two Dutch eyeglass makers, Zacharias Jansen and his father Hans, built the first microscope. They put several magnifying lenses in a tube. They discovered that using more than one lens magnified objects more than a single lens. Their simple microscope could make small objects appear nine times bigger than they really were. 	an electron microscope magnifies objects up to 2 billion times larger than their actual size	false
In the late 1600s, Anton van Leeuwenhoek, a Dutch lens maker and scientist, started making much stronger microscopes. His microscopes could magnify objects as much as 270 times their actual size. Van Leeuwenhoek made many scientific discoveries using his microscopes. He was the first to see and describe bacteria. He observed them in a sample of plaque that he had scraped off his own teeth. He also saw yeast cells, human sperm cells, and the microscopic life teeming in a drop of pond water. He even saw blood cells circulating in tiny blood vessels called capillaries. The drawings in Figure 1.12 show some of tiny organisms and living cells that van Leeuwenhoek viewed with his microscopes. He called them animalcules. 	the first microscope was made by anton van leeuwenhoek	false
The microscope was invented more than four centuries ago. In the late 1500s, two Dutch eyeglass makers, Zacharias Jansen and his father Hans, built the first microscope. They put several magnifying lenses in a tube. They discovered that using more than one lens magnified objects more than a single lens. Their simple microscope could make small objects appear nine times bigger than they really were. 	the jansens discovered that one lens magnified objects more than several lenses	false
Many life science discoveries would not have been possible without the microscope. For example: Cells are the tiny building blocks of living things. They couldnt be discovered until the microscope was invented. The discovery of cells led to the cell theory. This is one of the most important theories in life science. Bacteria are among the most numerous living things on the planet. They also cause many diseases. However, no one knew bacteria even existed until they could be seen with a microscope. The invention of the microscope allowed scientists to see cells, bacteria, and many other structures that are too small to be seen with the unaided eye. It gave them a direct view into the unseen world of the extremely tiny. You can get a glimpse of that world in Figure 1.10. 	the cell theory depended on the discovery of the microscope	true
Many life science discoveries would not have been possible without the microscope. For example: Cells are the tiny building blocks of living things. They couldnt be discovered until the microscope was invented. The discovery of cells led to the cell theory. This is one of the most important theories in life science. Bacteria are among the most numerous living things on the planet. They also cause many diseases. However, no one knew bacteria even existed until they could be seen with a microscope. The invention of the microscope allowed scientists to see cells, bacteria, and many other structures that are too small to be seen with the unaided eye. It gave them a direct view into the unseen world of the extremely tiny. You can get a glimpse of that world in Figure 1.10. 	only light of certain wavelengths is visible to the human eye	true
In the late 1600s, Anton van Leeuwenhoek, a Dutch lens maker and scientist, started making much stronger microscopes. His microscopes could magnify objects as much as 270 times their actual size. Van Leeuwenhoek made many scientific discoveries using his microscopes. He was the first to see and describe bacteria. He observed them in a sample of plaque that he had scraped off his own teeth. He also saw yeast cells, human sperm cells, and the microscopic life teeming in a drop of pond water. He even saw blood cells circulating in tiny blood vessels called capillaries. The drawings in Figure 1.12 show some of tiny organisms and living cells that van Leeuwenhoek viewed with his microscopes. He called them animalcules. 	the jansens microscopes were stronger than van leeuwenhoeks microscopes	false
These early microscopes used lenses to refract light and create magnified images. This type of microscope is called a light microscope. Light microscopes continued to improve and are still used today. The microscope you might use in science class is a light microscope. The most powerful light microscopes now available can make objects look up to 2000 times their actual size. You can learn how to use a light microscope by watching this short video: http MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  To see what you might observe with a light microscope, watch the following video. It shows some amazing creatures in a drop of stagnant water from an old boat. What do you think the creatures might be? Do they look like any of van Leeuwenhoeks animalcules in Figure 1.12? MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  For an object to be visible with a light microscope, it cant be smaller than the wavelength of visible light (about 550 nanometers). To view smaller objects, a different type of microscope, such as an electron microscope, must be used. Electron microscopes pass beams of electrons through or across an object. They can make a very clear image that is up to 2 million times bigger than the actual object. An electron microscope was used to make the image of the ant head in Figure 1.10. 	electron microscopes are more powerful than light microscopes	true
In the late 1600s, Anton van Leeuwenhoek, a Dutch lens maker and scientist, started making much stronger microscopes. His microscopes could magnify objects as much as 270 times their actual size. Van Leeuwenhoek made many scientific discoveries using his microscopes. He was the first to see and describe bacteria. He observed them in a sample of plaque that he had scraped off his own teeth. He also saw yeast cells, human sperm cells, and the microscopic life teeming in a drop of pond water. He even saw blood cells circulating in tiny blood vessels called capillaries. The drawings in Figure 1.12 show some of tiny organisms and living cells that van Leeuwenhoek viewed with his microscopes. He called them animalcules. 	light microscopes are no longer used today	false
In the mid-1600s, the English scientist Robert Hooke was one of the first scientists to observe living things with a microscope. He published the first book of microscopic studies, called Micrographia. It includes wonderful drawings of microscopic organisms and other objects. One of Hookes most important discoveries came when he viewed thin slices of cork under a microscope. Cork is made from the bark of a tree. When Hooke viewed it under a microscope, he saw many tiny compartments that he called cells. He made the drawing in Figure 1.11 to show what he observed. Hooke was the first person to observe the cells from a once-living organism. 	first scientist to observe bacteria with a microscope	1.b
In the mid-1600s, the English scientist Robert Hooke was one of the first scientists to observe living things with a microscope. He published the first book of microscopic studies, called Micrographia. It includes wonderful drawings of microscopic organisms and other objects. One of Hookes most important discoveries came when he viewed thin slices of cork under a microscope. Cork is made from the bark of a tree. When Hooke viewed it under a microscope, he saw many tiny compartments that he called cells. He made the drawing in Figure 1.11 to show what he observed. Hooke was the first person to observe the cells from a once-living organism. 	microscopic building block of all living things	2.c
In the mid-1600s, the English scientist Robert Hooke was one of the first scientists to observe living things with a microscope. He published the first book of microscopic studies, called Micrographia. It includes wonderful drawings of microscopic organisms and other objects. One of Hookes most important discoveries came when he viewed thin slices of cork under a microscope. Cork is made from the bark of a tree. When Hooke viewed it under a microscope, he saw many tiny compartments that he called cells. He made the drawing in Figure 1.11 to show what he observed. Hooke was the first person to observe the cells from a once-living organism. 	scientist who discovered cells	3.f
The microscope was invented more than four centuries ago. In the late 1500s, two Dutch eyeglass makers, Zacharias Jansen and his father Hans, built the first microscope. They put several magnifying lenses in a tube. They discovered that using more than one lens magnified objects more than a single lens. Their simple microscope could make small objects appear nine times bigger than they really were. 	type of microscope that uses lenses to refract visible light	4.g
The microscope was invented more than four centuries ago. In the late 1500s, two Dutch eyeglass makers, Zacharias Jansen and his father Hans, built the first microscope. They put several magnifying lenses in a tube. They discovered that using more than one lens magnified objects more than a single lens. Their simple microscope could make small objects appear nine times bigger than they really were. 	general term for an instrument that makes magnified images of very small objects	5.a
Many life science discoveries would not have been possible without the microscope. For example: Cells are the tiny building blocks of living things. They couldnt be discovered until the microscope was invented. The discovery of cells led to the cell theory. This is one of the most important theories in life science. Bacteria are among the most numerous living things on the planet. They also cause many diseases. However, no one knew bacteria even existed until they could be seen with a microscope. The invention of the microscope allowed scientists to see cells, bacteria, and many other structures that are too small to be seen with the unaided eye. It gave them a direct view into the unseen world of the extremely tiny. You can get a glimpse of that world in Figure 1.10. 	name associated with the invention of the microscope	6.d
The microscope was invented more than four centuries ago. In the late 1500s, two Dutch eyeglass makers, Zacharias Jansen and his father Hans, built the first microscope. They put several magnifying lenses in a tube. They discovered that using more than one lens magnified objects more than a single lens. Their simple microscope could make small objects appear nine times bigger than they really were. 	type of microscope that passes electrons over or through objects	7.e
Flatworms are invertebrates that belong to Phylum Platyhelminthes. There are more than 25,000 species in the flatworm phylum. Not all flatworms are as long as tapeworms. Some are only about a millimeter in length. 	most flatworm species have separate sexes	false
Flatworms reproduce sexually. In most species, the same individuals produce both eggs and sperm. After fertilization occurs, the fertilized eggs pass out of the adults body and hatch into larvae. There may be several different larval stages. The final larval stage develops into the adult form. Then the life cycle repeats. 	when flatworms reproduce eggs are fertilized outside the body	false
Roundworms have a round body because they have a partial fluid-filled body cavity (pseudocoelom). This is one way that roundworms differ from flatworms. Another way is their complete digestive system. It allows them to eat, digest food, and eliminate wastes all at the same time. Roundworms have a tough covering of cuticle on the surface of their body. It prevents their body from expanding. This allows the buildup of fluid pressure in their partial body cavity. The fluid pressure adds stiffness to the body. This provides a counterforce for the contraction of muscles, allowing roundworms to move easily over surfaces. 	flatworms can eat digest food and eliminate wastes all at the same time	false
Roundworms may be free-living or parasitic organisms. Free-living worms are found mainly in freshwater habitats. Some live in moist soil. They generally feed on bacteria, fungi, protozoa, or decaying organic matter. By breaking down organic matter, they play an important role in the carbon cycle. Parasitic roundworms may have plant, invertebrate, or vertebrate hosts. Several roundworm species infect humans. Besides ascaris, they include hookworms. Hookworms are named for the hooks they use to grab onto the hosts intestines. You can see the hooks in Figure 12.14. Hookworm larvae enter the host through the skin. They migrate to the intestine, where they mature into adults. Female adults lay large quantities of eggs. Eggs pass out of the host in feces. Eggs hatch into larvae in the feces or soil. Then the cycle repeats. You can learn more about parasitic roundworms in humans by watching this short video:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	freeliving roundworms may feed on bacteria fungi or protozoa	true
Roundworms reproduce sexually. Sperm and eggs are produced by separate male and female adults. Fertilization takes place inside the female organism. Females lay huge numbers of eggs, sometimes as many as 100,000 per day! The eggs hatch into larvae, which develop into adults. Then the life cycle repeats. 	roundworms play an important role in the carbon cycle	true
Flatworms are invertebrates that belong to Phylum Platyhelminthes. There are more than 25,000 species in the flatworm phylum. Not all flatworms are as long as tapeworms. Some are only about a millimeter in length. 	all flatworms are several meters long	false
Flatworms are invertebrates that belong to Phylum Platyhelminthes. There are more than 25,000 species in the flatworm phylum. Not all flatworms are as long as tapeworms. Some are only about a millimeter in length. 	flatworms have a concentration of nerve tissue in the head end	true
Flatworms reproduce sexually. In most species, the same individuals produce both eggs and sperm. After fertilization occurs, the fertilized eggs pass out of the adults body and hatch into larvae. There may be several different larval stages. The final larval stage develops into the adult form. Then the life cycle repeats. 	flatworms may have several different larval stages	true
Some flatworms live in water or moist soil. They eat invertebrates and decaying animals. Other flatworms, such as tapeworms, are parasites that live inside vertebrate hosts. Usually, more than one type of host is needed to complete the parasites life cycle, as shown in Figure 12.12. 	a parasitic flatworm usually needs more than one type of host to complete its life cycle	true
Roundworms are invertebrates in Phylum Nematoda. This is a very diverse phylum. It has more than 80,000 known species. Roundworms range in length from less than 1 millimeter to over 7 meters in length. You can see an example of a roundworm in Figure 12.13. 	phylum nematoda has less than 800 known species	false
Roundworms have a round body because they have a partial fluid-filled body cavity (pseudocoelom). This is one way that roundworms differ from flatworms. Another way is their complete digestive system. It allows them to eat, digest food, and eliminate wastes all at the same time. Roundworms have a tough covering of cuticle on the surface of their body. It prevents their body from expanding. This allows the buildup of fluid pressure in their partial body cavity. The fluid pressure adds stiffness to the body. This provides a counterforce for the contraction of muscles, allowing roundworms to move easily over surfaces. 	the body of a roundworm has a tough covering of cuticle	true
Some flatworms live in water or moist soil. They eat invertebrates and decaying animals. Other flatworms, such as tapeworms, are parasites that live inside vertebrate hosts. Usually, more than one type of host is needed to complete the parasites life cycle, as shown in Figure 12.12. 	all parasitic roundworms have vertebrate hosts	false
Flatworms are invertebrates that belong to Phylum Platyhelminthes. There are more than 25,000 species in the flatworm phylum. Not all flatworms are as long as tapeworms. Some are only about a millimeter in length. 	name of the phylum to which roundworms belong	1.c
Some flatworms live in water or moist soil. They eat invertebrates and decaying animals. Other flatworms, such as tapeworms, are parasites that live inside vertebrate hosts. Usually, more than one type of host is needed to complete the parasites life cycle, as shown in Figure 12.12. 	common name for the type of worm that has a pseudocoelom	2.d
Roundworms are invertebrates in Phylum Nematoda. This is a very diverse phylum. It has more than 80,000 known species. Roundworms range in length from less than 1 millimeter to over 7 meters in length. You can see an example of a roundworm in Figure 12.13. 	parasitic roundworm with special structures for attaching to the hosts intestines	3.a
Some flatworms live in water or moist soil. They eat invertebrates and decaying animals. Other flatworms, such as tapeworms, are parasites that live inside vertebrate hosts. Usually, more than one type of host is needed to complete the parasites life cycle, as shown in Figure 12.12. 	common name for the type of worm that lacks a pseudocoelom	4.b
Flatworms are invertebrates that belong to Phylum Platyhelminthes. There are more than 25,000 species in the flatworm phylum. Not all flatworms are as long as tapeworms. Some are only about a millimeter in length. 	example of a flatworm that is a human parasite	5.g
Flatworms are invertebrates that belong to Phylum Platyhelminthes. There are more than 25,000 species in the flatworm phylum. Not all flatworms are as long as tapeworms. Some are only about a millimeter in length. 	name of the phylum to which flatworms belong	6.f
Roundworms may be free-living or parasitic organisms. Free-living worms are found mainly in freshwater habitats. Some live in moist soil. They generally feed on bacteria, fungi, protozoa, or decaying organic matter. By breaking down organic matter, they play an important role in the carbon cycle. Parasitic roundworms may have plant, invertebrate, or vertebrate hosts. Several roundworm species infect humans. Besides ascaris, they include hookworms. Hookworms are named for the hooks they use to grab onto the hosts intestines. You can see the hooks in Figure 12.14. Hookworm larvae enter the host through the skin. They migrate to the intestine, where they mature into adults. Female adults lay large quantities of eggs. Eggs pass out of the host in feces. Eggs hatch into larvae in the feces or soil. Then the cycle repeats. You can learn more about parasitic roundworms in humans by watching this short video:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	largest and most common parasitic worm in humans	7.e
Mollusks have a true coelom and complete digestive system. They also have circulatory and excretory systems. They have a heart that pumps blood, and organs that filter out wastes from the blood. You can see some other traits of mollusks in the garden snail in Figure 12.16. Like the snail, many other mollusks have a hard outer shell. It is secreted by special tissue called mantle on the outer surface of the body. The shell covers the top of the body and encloses the internal organs. Most mollusks have a distinct head region. The head may have tentacles for sensing the environment and grasping food. Mollusks generally have a muscular foot, which may be used for walking or other purposes. A unique feature of mollusks is the radula. This is a feeding organ with teeth made of chitin. It is located in front of the mouth in the head region. It can be used to scrape algae off rocks or drill holes in the shells of prey. You can see the radula of the sea slug in Figure 12.17. 	special tissue on the outer surface of a mollusk that secretes a shell	1.g
Annelids live in a diversity of freshwater, salt-water, and terrestrial habitats. They vary in what they eat and how they get their food. Some annelids, such as earthworms, eat soil and extract organic material from it. Annelids called leeches are either predators or parasites. Some leeches capture and eat other invertebrates. Others feed off the blood of vertebrate hosts. Annelids called polychaete worms live on the ocean floor. They may be filter feeders, predators, or scavengers. The amazing feather duster worm in Figure 12.19 is a polychaete that has a fan-like crown of tentacles for filter feeding. 	type of annelid that feeds off the blood of a vertebrate host	2.f
Annelids have a large coelom. They also have several organ systems. These include a: circulatory system; excretory system; complete digestive system; and nervous system, with a brain and sensory organs. 	mollusk feeding organ with teeth	3.e
Have you ever been to the ocean or eaten seafood? If you have, then youve probably encountered members of Phylum Mollusca. In addition to snails, mollusks include squids, slugs, scallops, and clams. You can see a clam in Figure 12.15. There are more than 100,000 known species of mollusks. Some mollusks are nearly microscopic. The largest mollusk, the colossal squid, may be as long as a school bus and weigh over half a ton! Watch this short video to see an amazing diversity of mollusks:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	name of the phylum to which snails belong	4.d
Annelids live in a diversity of freshwater, salt-water, and terrestrial habitats. They vary in what they eat and how they get their food. Some annelids, such as earthworms, eat soil and extract organic material from it. Annelids called leeches are either predators or parasites. Some leeches capture and eat other invertebrates. Others feed off the blood of vertebrate hosts. Annelids called polychaete worms live on the ocean floor. They may be filter feeders, predators, or scavengers. The amazing feather duster worm in Figure 12.19 is a polychaete that has a fan-like crown of tentacles for filter feeding. 	type of annelid that lives on the ocean floor	5.c
Annelids are segmented worms in Phylum Annelida. There are about 15,000 species of annelids. They range in length from less than a millimeter to more than 3 meters. To learn more about the amazing diversity and adaptations of annelids, watch this excellent video: http://shapeoflife.org/video/annelids-powerful-and-capable-worms MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	name of the phylum to which earthworms belong	6.a
Annelids have a large coelom. They also have several organ systems. These include a: circulatory system; excretory system; complete digestive system; and nervous system, with a brain and sensory organs. 	trait found in annelids but not in roundworms	7.b
Have you ever been to the ocean or eaten seafood? If you have, then youve probably encountered members of Phylum Mollusca. In addition to snails, mollusks include squids, slugs, scallops, and clams. You can see a clam in Figure 12.15. There are more than 100,000 known species of mollusks. Some mollusks are nearly microscopic. The largest mollusk, the colossal squid, may be as long as a school bus and weigh over half a ton! Watch this short video to see an amazing diversity of mollusks:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	some mollusks are so small that they are nearly microscopic	true
Annelids are divided into many repeating segments. The earthworm in Figure 12.18 is an annelid. You can clearly see its many segments. Segmentation of annelids is highly adaptive. Each segment has its own nerve and muscle tissues. This allows the animal to move very efficiently. Some segments can also be specialized to carry out particular functions. They may have special structures on them. For example, they might have tentacles for sensing or feeding, paddles for swimming, or suckers for clinging to surfaces. 	the head of a mollusk may have tentacles for sensing the environment	true
Mollusks live in most terrestrial, freshwater, and marine habitats. However, the majority of species live in the ocean. They can be found in both shallow and deep water and from tropical to polar latitudes. They have a variety of ways of getting food. Some are free-living heterotrophs. Others are internal parasites. Mollusks are also eaten by many other organisms, including humans. 	all mollusks are freeliving heterotrophs	false
Most annelids can reproduce both asexually and sexually. Asexual reproduction may occur by budding or fission. Sexual reproduction varies by species. Some species go through a larval stage before developing into adults. Other species grow to adult size without going through a larval stage. 	there are more than a million known species of annelids	false
Most annelids can reproduce both asexually and sexually. Asexual reproduction may occur by budding or fission. Sexual reproduction varies by species. Some species go through a larval stage before developing into adults. Other species grow to adult size without going through a larval stage. 	annelids can reproduce only sexually	false
Mollusks reproduce sexually. Most species have separate male and female sexes. Fertilization may be internal or external, depending on the species. Fertilized eggs develop into larvae. There may be one or more larval stages. Each one is different from the adult stage. 	there are more than 100000 known species of mollusks	true
Have you ever been to the ocean or eaten seafood? If you have, then youve probably encountered members of Phylum Mollusca. In addition to snails, mollusks include squids, slugs, scallops, and clams. You can see a clam in Figure 12.15. There are more than 100,000 known species of mollusks. Some mollusks are nearly microscopic. The largest mollusk, the colossal squid, may be as long as a school bus and weigh over half a ton! Watch this short video to see an amazing diversity of mollusks:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the largest mollusk is about as big as a human adults fist	false
Mollusks have a true coelom and complete digestive system. They also have circulatory and excretory systems. They have a heart that pumps blood, and organs that filter out wastes from the blood. You can see some other traits of mollusks in the garden snail in Figure 12.16. Like the snail, many other mollusks have a hard outer shell. It is secreted by special tissue called mantle on the outer surface of the body. The shell covers the top of the body and encloses the internal organs. Most mollusks have a distinct head region. The head may have tentacles for sensing the environment and grasping food. Mollusks generally have a muscular foot, which may be used for walking or other purposes. A unique feature of mollusks is the radula. This is a feeding organ with teeth made of chitin. It is located in front of the mouth in the head region. It can be used to scrape algae off rocks or drill holes in the shells of prey. You can see the radula of the sea slug in Figure 12.17. 	a mollusk has a heart that pumps blood	true
Mollusks live in most terrestrial, freshwater, and marine habitats. However, the majority of species live in the ocean. They can be found in both shallow and deep water and from tropical to polar latitudes. They have a variety of ways of getting food. Some are free-living heterotrophs. Others are internal parasites. Mollusks are also eaten by many other organisms, including humans. 	the majority of mollusks live in moist soil	false
Annelids are divided into many repeating segments. The earthworm in Figure 12.18 is an annelid. You can clearly see its many segments. Segmentation of annelids is highly adaptive. Each segment has its own nerve and muscle tissues. This allows the animal to move very efficiently. Some segments can also be specialized to carry out particular functions. They may have special structures on them. For example, they might have tentacles for sensing or feeding, paddles for swimming, or suckers for clinging to surfaces. 	annelids may have tentacles that they use for sensing or feeding	true
Annelids have a large coelom. They also have several organ systems. These include a: circulatory system; excretory system; complete digestive system; and nervous system, with a brain and sensory organs. 	annelids have a large coelom	true
Annelids live in a diversity of freshwater, salt-water, and terrestrial habitats. They vary in what they eat and how they get their food. Some annelids, such as earthworms, eat soil and extract organic material from it. Annelids called leeches are either predators or parasites. Some leeches capture and eat other invertebrates. Others feed off the blood of vertebrate hosts. Annelids called polychaete worms live on the ocean floor. They may be filter feeders, predators, or scavengers. The amazing feather duster worm in Figure 12.19 is a polychaete that has a fan-like crown of tentacles for filter feeding. 	some annelids are filter feeders	true
The earliest amphibians evolved from a lobe-finned fish ancestor. This occurred about 365 million years ago. Amphibians were the first terrestrial vertebrates. They lived on land as adults, but they had to return to the water to reproduce. The earliest reptiles evolved from an amphibian ancestor. This occurred at least 300 million years ago. Reptiles were the first vertebrates that did not need water to reproduce. Thats because they laid waterproof amniotic eggs. These eggs allowed the embryo inside to breathe without drying out. Mammals and birds both evolved from reptile-like ancestors. The first mammals appeared about 200 million years ago. The earliest birds evolved about 150 million years ago. 	amphibians were the first vertebrates that did not need water to reproduce	false
The earliest vertebrates were jawless fish. They evolved about 550 million years ago. They were probably similar to modern hagfish (see Table 13.1). The tree diagram in Figure 13.4 summarizes how vertebrates evolved from that time forward. 	vertebrates evolved endothermy before they evolved ectothermy	false
The earliest amphibians evolved from a lobe-finned fish ancestor. This occurred about 365 million years ago. Amphibians were the first terrestrial vertebrates. They lived on land as adults, but they had to return to the water to reproduce. The earliest reptiles evolved from an amphibian ancestor. This occurred at least 300 million years ago. Reptiles were the first vertebrates that did not need water to reproduce. Thats because they laid waterproof amniotic eggs. These eggs allowed the embryo inside to breathe without drying out. Mammals and birds both evolved from reptile-like ancestors. The first mammals appeared about 200 million years ago. The earliest birds evolved about 150 million years ago. 	amphibians evolved from a lobefinned fish ancestor	true
Like all chordates, vertebrates are animals with four defining traits, at least during the embryonic stage. The four traits are: a notochord; a dorsal hollow nerve cord; a post-anal tail; and pharyngeal slits. Some invertebrates also have these traits and are classified as chordates. What traits do vertebrates have that set them apart from invertebrate chordates? 	all animals in phylum chordata are vertebrates	false
Most vertebrates share several other traits. The majority of vertebrates have: scales, feathers, fur, or hair covering their skin; muscles attached to the endoskeleton to allow movement; a circulatory system with a heart that pumps blood through a closed network of blood vessels; an excretory system that includes a pair of kidneys for filtering wastes out of the blood; a central nervous system with a brain, spinal cord, and nerve fibers throughout the body; an adaptive immune system that learns to recognize specific pathogens and launch tailor-made attacks against them; and an endocrine system with glands that secrete chemical messenger molecules called hormones. 	the function of vertebrate kidneys is filtering wastes out of the blood	true
Most vertebrates share several other traits. The majority of vertebrates have: scales, feathers, fur, or hair covering their skin; muscles attached to the endoskeleton to allow movement; a circulatory system with a heart that pumps blood through a closed network of blood vessels; an excretory system that includes a pair of kidneys for filtering wastes out of the blood; a central nervous system with a brain, spinal cord, and nerve fibers throughout the body; an adaptive immune system that learns to recognize specific pathogens and launch tailor-made attacks against them; and an endocrine system with glands that secrete chemical messenger molecules called hormones. 	the adaptive immune system of vertebrates learns to recognize and attack specific pathogens	true
The earliest fish had an endoskeleton made of cartilage rather than bone. They also lacked a complete vertebral column. The first fish with a complete vertebral column evolved about 450 million years ago. These fish had jaws. They may have been similar to living sharks. About 400 million years ago, the first fish with a bony endoskeleton evolved. A bony skeleton could support a bigger body. Early bony fish evolved into modern ray-finned fish and lobe-finned fish. 	the earliest fish had a cartilage endoskeleton	true
The earliest amphibians evolved from a lobe-finned fish ancestor. This occurred about 365 million years ago. Amphibians were the first terrestrial vertebrates. They lived on land as adults, but they had to return to the water to reproduce. The earliest reptiles evolved from an amphibian ancestor. This occurred at least 300 million years ago. Reptiles were the first vertebrates that did not need water to reproduce. Thats because they laid waterproof amniotic eggs. These eggs allowed the embryo inside to breathe without drying out. Mammals and birds both evolved from reptile-like ancestors. The first mammals appeared about 200 million years ago. The earliest birds evolved about 150 million years ago. 	birds evolved before the first mammals appeared	false
The vertebrate endoskeleton is made of bone and cartilage. Cartilage is a tough, flexible tissue that contains a protein called collagen. Bone is a hard tissue consisting of a collagen framework that is filled in with minerals such as calcium. Bone is less flexible than cartilage but stronger. A bony endoskeleton allows an animal to grow larger and heavier than a cartilage endoskeleton would. Bone also provides more protection for soft tissues and internal organs. 	an animal with a cartilage skeleton can grow larger than an animal with a bony skeleton	false
The earliest vertebrates were jawless fish. They evolved about 550 million years ago. They were probably similar to modern hagfish (see Table 13.1). The tree diagram in Figure 13.4 summarizes how vertebrates evolved from that time forward. 	there are more than a million living species of vertebrates	false
The earliest vertebrates were jawless fish. They evolved about 550 million years ago. They were probably similar to modern hagfish (see Table 13.1). The tree diagram in Figure 13.4 summarizes how vertebrates evolved from that time forward. 	living species of vertebrates are placed in five different classes	false
Vertebrates reproduce sexually. Most have separate male and female sexes. Vertebrates have one of three reproduc- tive strategies: ovipary, ovovivipary, or vivipary. Ovipary refers to the development of an embryo within an egg outside the mothers body. This occurs in most fish, amphibians, and reptiles. It also occurs in all birds. Ovovivipary refers to the development of an embryo inside an egg within the mothers body. The egg remains inside the mothers body until it hatches, but the mother provides no nourishment to the developing embryo inside the egg. This occurs in some species of fish and reptiles. Vivipary refers to the development and nourishment of an embryo within the mothers body but not inside an egg. Birth may be followed by a period of parental care of the offspring. This reproductive strategy occurs in almost all mammals including humans. 	most vertebrates have separate male and female sexes	true
Vertebrates reproduce sexually. Most have separate male and female sexes. Vertebrates have one of three reproduc- tive strategies: ovipary, ovovivipary, or vivipary. Ovipary refers to the development of an embryo within an egg outside the mothers body. This occurs in most fish, amphibians, and reptiles. It also occurs in all birds. Ovovivipary refers to the development of an embryo inside an egg within the mothers body. The egg remains inside the mothers body until it hatches, but the mother provides no nourishment to the developing embryo inside the egg. This occurs in some species of fish and reptiles. Vivipary refers to the development and nourishment of an embryo within the mothers body but not inside an egg. Birth may be followed by a period of parental care of the offspring. This reproductive strategy occurs in almost all mammals including humans. 	development of an embryo in an egg outside the mothers body	1.g
Early vertebrates were ectothermic. Ectothermy means controlling body temperature to just a limited extent from the outside by changing behavior. For example, an ectotherm might stay in the shade to keep cool on a hot, sunny day. On a cold day, an ectotherm might bask in the sun to warm up, like the snake in Figure 13.5. Almost all living fish, amphibians, and reptiles are ectothermic. They can raise or lower their body temperature by their behavior but not by very much. In cold weather, an ectotherm cools down. As its body temperature drops, its metabolism slows down and it becomes inactive. Both mammals and birds evolved endothermy. Endothermy means controlling body temperature within a narrow range from the inside through biochemical or physical means. For example, on a cold day, an endotherm may produce more body heat by increasing its rate of metabolism. On a hot day, it may give off more heat by increasing blood flow to the surface of the body. That way, some of the heat can radiate into the air from the bodys surface. Endothermy requires more energy (and food) than ectothermy. However, it allows the animal to stay active regardless of the temperature outside. You can learn more about how vertebrates regulate their temperature by watching this video:  . 	use of behavior to control body temperature from the outside	2.d
Vertebrates reproduce sexually. Most have separate male and female sexes. Vertebrates have one of three reproduc- tive strategies: ovipary, ovovivipary, or vivipary. Ovipary refers to the development of an embryo within an egg outside the mothers body. This occurs in most fish, amphibians, and reptiles. It also occurs in all birds. Ovovivipary refers to the development of an embryo inside an egg within the mothers body. The egg remains inside the mothers body until it hatches, but the mother provides no nourishment to the developing embryo inside the egg. This occurs in some species of fish and reptiles. Vivipary refers to the development and nourishment of an embryo within the mothers body but not inside an egg. Birth may be followed by a period of parental care of the offspring. This reproductive strategy occurs in almost all mammals including humans. 	reproductive strategy that occurs in almost all mammals	3.e
The vertebrate endoskeleton is made of bone and cartilage. Cartilage is a tough, flexible tissue that contains a protein called collagen. Bone is a hard tissue consisting of a collagen framework that is filled in with minerals such as calcium. Bone is less flexible than cartilage but stronger. A bony endoskeleton allows an animal to grow larger and heavier than a cartilage endoskeleton would. Bone also provides more protection for soft tissues and internal organs. 	tough flexible tissue that contains collagen	4.c
Early vertebrates were ectothermic. Ectothermy means controlling body temperature to just a limited extent from the outside by changing behavior. For example, an ectotherm might stay in the shade to keep cool on a hot, sunny day. On a cold day, an ectotherm might bask in the sun to warm up, like the snake in Figure 13.5. Almost all living fish, amphibians, and reptiles are ectothermic. They can raise or lower their body temperature by their behavior but not by very much. In cold weather, an ectotherm cools down. As its body temperature drops, its metabolism slows down and it becomes inactive. Both mammals and birds evolved endothermy. Endothermy means controlling body temperature within a narrow range from the inside through biochemical or physical means. For example, on a cold day, an endotherm may produce more body heat by increasing its rate of metabolism. On a hot day, it may give off more heat by increasing blood flow to the surface of the body. That way, some of the heat can radiate into the air from the bodys surface. Endothermy requires more energy (and food) than ectothermy. However, it allows the animal to stay active regardless of the temperature outside. You can learn more about how vertebrates regulate their temperature by watching this video:  . 	use of biology to control body temperature from the inside	5.f
The vertebrate endoskeleton is made of bone and cartilage. Cartilage is a tough, flexible tissue that contains a protein called collagen. Bone is a hard tissue consisting of a collagen framework that is filled in with minerals such as calcium. Bone is less flexible than cartilage but stronger. A bony endoskeleton allows an animal to grow larger and heavier than a cartilage endoskeleton would. Bone also provides more protection for soft tissues and internal organs. 	hard tissue that contains minerals in a collagen framework	6. a
Vertebrates reproduce sexually. Most have separate male and female sexes. Vertebrates have one of three reproduc- tive strategies: ovipary, ovovivipary, or vivipary. Ovipary refers to the development of an embryo within an egg outside the mothers body. This occurs in most fish, amphibians, and reptiles. It also occurs in all birds. Ovovivipary refers to the development of an embryo inside an egg within the mothers body. The egg remains inside the mothers body until it hatches, but the mother provides no nourishment to the developing embryo inside the egg. This occurs in some species of fish and reptiles. Vivipary refers to the development and nourishment of an embryo within the mothers body but not inside an egg. Birth may be followed by a period of parental care of the offspring. This reproductive strategy occurs in almost all mammals including humans. 	development of an embryo in an egg inside the mothers body	7. b
Fish are aquatic vertebrates. They make up more than half of all living vertebrate species. Most fish are ectothermic. They share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water. 	fish have a circulatory system with a heart	true
Fish have a circulatory system with a heart. They also have a complete digestive system. It includes several organs and other structures. Fish with jaws use their jaws and teeth to chew food before swallowing it. This allows them to eat larger prey animals. Fish have a nervous system with a brain. Fish brains are small compared with the brains of other vertebrates. However, they are large and complex compared with the brains of invertebrates. Fish also have highly developed sense organs. They include organs to see, hear, feel, smell, and taste. 	fish can see and hear but they cant smell or taste	false
Almost all fish have sexual reproduction, generally with separate sexes. Each fish typically produces large numbers of sperm or eggs. Fertilization takes place in the water outside the body in the majority of fish. Most fish are oviparous. The embryo develops in an egg outside the mothers body. 	a fish embryo develops in an egg inside the mothers body	false
Fish are aquatic vertebrates. They make up more than half of all living vertebrate species. Most fish are ectothermic. They share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water. 	mouth brooding refers to a form of predation in some species of fish	false
Fish are aquatic vertebrates. They make up more than half of all living vertebrate species. Most fish are ectothermic. They share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water. 	fish have a nervous system with a brain	true
Fish are aquatic vertebrates. They make up more than half of all living vertebrate species. Most fish are ectothermic. They share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water. 	almost all fish have internal fertilization of gametes	false
Fish are aquatic vertebrates. They make up more than half of all living vertebrate species. Most fish are ectothermic. They share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water. 	there are about 28000 living species of fish	true
Fish are aquatic vertebrates. They make up more than half of all living vertebrate species. Most fish are ectothermic. They share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water. 	most fish parents provide care to their offspring	false
There are about 28,000 living species of fish. They are placed in five different classes. The classes are commonly called hagfish, lampreys, cartilaginous fish, ray-finned fish, and lobe-finned fish. Table 13.2 shows pictures of fish in each class. It also provides additional information about the classes. Class Hagfish Lampreys Cartilaginous Fish Distinguishing Traits Hagfish are very primitive fish. They lack scales and fins. They even lack a backbone, but they do have a cranium. They secrete large amounts of thick, slimy mucus. This makes them slippery, so they can slip out of the jaws of predators. Lampreys lack scales but have fins and a partial backbone. Their mouth is surrounded by a large round sucker with teeth. They use the sucker to suck the blood of other fish. Example hagfish Cartilaginous fish include sharks, rays, and ratfish. Their endoskele- ton is made of cartilage instead of bone. They also lack a swim blad- der. However, they have a complete vertebral column and jaws. They also have a relatively big brain. shark lampreys Class Ray-Finned Fish Lobe-Finned Fish Distinguishing Traits Ray-finned fish make up the ma- jority of living fish species. They are a type of bony fish, with an en- doskeleton made of bone instead of cartilage. Their fins consist of webs of skin over flexible bony spines, called rays. They have a swim blad- der. Lobe-finned fish include only coelacanths and lungfish. They are bony fish with an endoskeleton made of bone. Their fleshy fins contain bone and muscle. Lungfish are named for a lung-like organ that they can use for breathing air. It evolved from the swim bladder. It allows them to survive for long periods of time out of water. Example puffer lungfish 	hagfish have a backbone but lack a cranium	false
Fish are aquatic vertebrates. They make up more than half of all living vertebrate species. Most fish are ectothermic. They share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water. 	bony fish include rayfinned fish and lobefinned fish	true
Fish eggs hatch into larvae. Each larva swims around attached to a yolk sac from the egg (see Figure 13.9). The yolk sac provides it with food. Fish larvae look different from adult fish of the same species. They must go through metamorphosis to change into the adult form. 	fish larvae look like miniature versions of the adults	false
Fish are aquatic vertebrates. They make up more than half of all living vertebrate species. Most fish are ectothermic. They share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water. 	rayfinned fish make up the majority of living fish species	true
Fish are aquatic vertebrates. They make up more than half of all living vertebrate species. Most fish are ectothermic. They share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water. 	inflatable fish organ that allows a fish to rise or sink in the water	1.c
Fish are aquatic vertebrates. They make up more than half of all living vertebrate species. Most fish are ectothermic. They share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water. 	common reproductive behavior in fish	2.e
Fish are aquatic vertebrates. They make up more than half of all living vertebrate species. Most fish are ectothermic. They share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water. 	fish organ that functions like a paddle or rudder	3.f
Fish are aquatic vertebrates. They make up more than half of all living vertebrate species. Most fish are ectothermic. They share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water. 	most primitive class of fish	4.a
Fish are aquatic vertebrates. They make up more than half of all living vertebrate species. Most fish are ectothermic. They share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water. 	fish organ that absorbs oxygen from water	5.g
Fish are aquatic vertebrates. They make up more than half of all living vertebrate species. Most fish are ectothermic. They share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water. 	fish class that includes sharks	6.d
Fish are aquatic vertebrates. They make up more than half of all living vertebrate species. Most fish are ectothermic. They share several adaptations that suit them for life in the water. 	rayfinned or lobefinned fish	7.b
Human organs are organized into organ systems. An organ system is a group of organs that work together to carry out a complex function. Each organ of the system does part of the overall job. For example, the heart is an organ in the circulatory system. The circulatory system also includes the blood vessels and blood. There are many different human organ systems. Figure 16.4 shows six of them and gives their functions. 	type of tissue that includes bone and cartilage	1.g
The four types of tissues make up all the organs of the human body. An organ is a structure composed of two or more types of tissues that work together to perform the same function. Examples of human organs include the skin, brain, lungs, kidneys, and heart. Consider the heart as an example. Figure 16.3 shows how all four tissue types work together to make the heart pump blood. 	structure composed of two or more types of tissues that work together to do the same task	2.d
The basic building blocks of the human body are cells. Human cells are organized into tissues, tissues are organized into organs, and organs are organized into organ systems. 	type of tissue that consists of cells that can contract	3.b
The basic building blocks of the human body are cells. Human cells are organized into tissues, tissues are organized into organs, and organs are organized into organ systems. 	one of the basic building blocks of the human body	4.c
Specialized cells are organized into tissues. A tissue is a group of specialized cells of the same kind that perform the same function. There are four basic types of human tissues: connective, epithelial, muscle, and nervous tissues. The four types are shown in Figure 16.2. Connective tissue consists of cells that form the bodys structure. Examples include bone and cartilage, which protect and support the body. Blood is also a connective tissue. It circulates and connects cells throughout the body. Epithelial tissue consists of cells that cover inner and outer body surfaces. Examples include skin and the linings of internal organs. Epithelial tissue protects the body and its internal organs. It also secretes substances such as hormones and absorbs substances such as nutrients. Muscle tissue consists of cells that can contract, or shorten. Examples include skeletal muscle, which is attached to bones and makes them move. Other types of muscle include cardiac muscle, which makes the heart beat, and smooth muscle, which is found in other internal organs. Nervous tissue consists of nerve cells, or neurons, which can send and receive electrical messages. Nervous tissue makes up the brain, spinal cord, and other nerves that run throughout the body. 	type of tissue that can send and receive electrical messages	5.a
The basic building blocks of the human body are cells. Human cells are organized into tissues, tissues are organized into organs, and organs are organized into organ systems. 	any group of specialized cells of the same type that perform the same function	6.f
Specialized cells are organized into tissues. A tissue is a group of specialized cells of the same kind that perform the same function. There are four basic types of human tissues: connective, epithelial, muscle, and nervous tissues. The four types are shown in Figure 16.2. Connective tissue consists of cells that form the bodys structure. Examples include bone and cartilage, which protect and support the body. Blood is also a connective tissue. It circulates and connects cells throughout the body. Epithelial tissue consists of cells that cover inner and outer body surfaces. Examples include skin and the linings of internal organs. Epithelial tissue protects the body and its internal organs. It also secretes substances such as hormones and absorbs substances such as nutrients. Muscle tissue consists of cells that can contract, or shorten. Examples include skeletal muscle, which is attached to bones and makes them move. Other types of muscle include cardiac muscle, which makes the heart beat, and smooth muscle, which is found in other internal organs. Nervous tissue consists of nerve cells, or neurons, which can send and receive electrical messages. Nervous tissue makes up the brain, spinal cord, and other nerves that run throughout the body. 	type of tissue that covers inner and outer body surfaces	7. e
The basic building blocks of the human body are cells. Human cells are organized into tissues, tissues are organized into organs, and organs are organized into organ systems. 	the basic units of structure and function of the human body are organs	false
The basic building blocks of the human body are cells. Human cells are organized into tissues, tissues are organized into organs, and organs are organized into organ systems. 	most human cells are specialized for specific functions	true
The basic building blocks of the human body are cells. Human cells are organized into tissues, tissues are organized into organs, and organs are organized into organ systems. 	a tissue consists of four basic types of cells	false
Human organs are organized into organ systems. An organ system is a group of organs that work together to carry out a complex function. Each organ of the system does part of the overall job. For example, the heart is an organ in the circulatory system. The circulatory system also includes the blood vessels and blood. There are many different human organ systems. Figure 16.4 shows six of them and gives their functions. 	the heart is an organ in the circulatory system	true
The average human adult consists of an incredible 100 trillion cells! Cells are the basic units of structure and function in the human body, as they are in all living things. Each cell must carry out basic life processes in order to survive and help keep the body alive. Most human cells also have characteristics for carrying out other, special functions. For example, muscle cells have extra mitochondria to provide the energy needed to move the body. You can see examples of these and some other specialized human cells in Figure 16.1. To learn more about specialized human cells and what they do, watch this video:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the average human adult consists of about a billion cells	false
The basic building blocks of the human body are cells. Human cells are organized into tissues, tissues are organized into organs, and organs are organized into organ systems. 	each cell of the body carries out basic life processes	true
The basic building blocks of the human body are cells. Human cells are organized into tissues, tissues are organized into organs, and organs are organized into organ systems. 	most human cells have specialized functions	true
The basic building blocks of the human body are cells. Human cells are organized into tissues, tissues are organized into organs, and organs are organized into organ systems. 	there are a total of five basic types of human tissues	false
The four types of tissues make up all the organs of the human body. An organ is a structure composed of two or more types of tissues that work together to perform the same function. Examples of human organs include the skin, brain, lungs, kidneys, and heart. Consider the heart as an example. Figure 16.3 shows how all four tissue types work together to make the heart pump blood. 	the skin consists mainly of muscle tissue	false
The basic building blocks of the human body are cells. Human cells are organized into tissues, tissues are organized into organs, and organs are organized into organ systems. 	neurons are cells that can send and receive electrical messages	true
Specialized cells are organized into tissues. A tissue is a group of specialized cells of the same kind that perform the same function. There are four basic types of human tissues: connective, epithelial, muscle, and nervous tissues. The four types are shown in Figure 16.2. Connective tissue consists of cells that form the bodys structure. Examples include bone and cartilage, which protect and support the body. Blood is also a connective tissue. It circulates and connects cells throughout the body. Epithelial tissue consists of cells that cover inner and outer body surfaces. Examples include skin and the linings of internal organs. Epithelial tissue protects the body and its internal organs. It also secretes substances such as hormones and absorbs substances such as nutrients. Muscle tissue consists of cells that can contract, or shorten. Examples include skeletal muscle, which is attached to bones and makes them move. Other types of muscle include cardiac muscle, which makes the heart beat, and smooth muscle, which is found in other internal organs. Nervous tissue consists of nerve cells, or neurons, which can send and receive electrical messages. Nervous tissue makes up the brain, spinal cord, and other nerves that run throughout the body. 	smooth muscle tissue is found in the heart	false
Human organs are organized into organ systems. An organ system is a group of organs that work together to carry out a complex function. Each organ of the system does part of the overall job. For example, the heart is an organ in the circulatory system. The circulatory system also includes the blood vessels and blood. There are many different human organ systems. Figure 16.4 shows six of them and gives their functions. 	connective tissues are found in the walls of blood vessels	true
You may spend a lot of time and money on your hair and nails. You may think of them as accessories, like clothes or jewelry. However, like the skin, the hair and nails also play important roles in helping the body maintain homeostasis. 	the human skin is about 2 centimeters thick	false
Fingernails and toenails are made of specialized cells that grow out of the epidermis. They too are filled with keratin. The keratin makes them tough and hard. Their job is to protect the ends of the fingers and toes. They also make it easier to feel things with the sensitive fingertips by acting as a counterforce when things are handled. 	all the cells on the surface of the epidermis are dead	true
You may spend a lot of time and money on your hair and nails. You may think of them as accessories, like clothes or jewelry. However, like the skin, the hair and nails also play important roles in helping the body maintain homeostasis. 	people with light skin have fewer melanocytes per square inch than people with dark skin	false
You may spend a lot of time and money on your hair and nails. You may think of them as accessories, like clothes or jewelry. However, like the skin, the hair and nails also play important roles in helping the body maintain homeostasis. 	the production of melanin in the skin is stimulated by exposure to ultraviolet light	true
You may spend a lot of time and money on your hair and nails. You may think of them as accessories, like clothes or jewelry. However, like the skin, the hair and nails also play important roles in helping the body maintain homeostasis. 	the function of sebum is to waterproof the hair and skin	true
You may spend a lot of time and money on your hair and nails. You may think of them as accessories, like clothes or jewelry. However, like the skin, the hair and nails also play important roles in helping the body maintain homeostasis. 	the skin helps maintain homeostasis by regulating body temperature	true
From the outside, the skin looks plain and simple, as you can see in Figure 16.5. But at a cellular level, theres nothing plain or simple about it. A single square inch of skin contains about 20 blood vessels, hundreds of sweat glands, and more than a thousand nerve endings. It also contains tens of thousands of pigment-producing cells. Clearly, there is much more to skin than meets the eye! For a dramatic introduction to the skin, watch this video: MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  The skin is only about 2 mm thick, or about as thick as the cover of a book. Although it is very thin, it consists of two distinct layers, called the epidermis and the dermis. You can see both layers and some of their structures in Figure 16.6. Refer to the figure as you read about the epidermis and dermis below. 	sweat contains only water and salt	false
You couldnt survive without your skin. It has many important functions. In several ways, it helps maintain homeostasis. The main function of the skin is controlling what enters and leaves the body. It prevents the loss of too much water from the body. It also prevents bacteria and other microorganisms from entering the body. Melanin in the epidermis absorbs ultraviolet light. This prevents the light from reaching and damaging the dermis. The skin helps maintain a constant body temperature. It keeps the body cool in two ways. Sweat from sweat glands in the skin evaporates to cool the body. Blood vessels in the skin dilate, or widen, increasing blood flow to the body surface. This allows more heat to reach the surface and radiate into the environment. The opposite happens to retain body heat. Blood vessels in the skin constrict, or narrow, decreasing blood flow to the body surface. This reduces the amount of heat that reaches the surface so less heat is lost to the environment. 	the main cause of acne is eating greasy foods	false
You couldnt survive without your skin. It has many important functions. In several ways, it helps maintain homeostasis. The main function of the skin is controlling what enters and leaves the body. It prevents the loss of too much water from the body. It also prevents bacteria and other microorganisms from entering the body. Melanin in the epidermis absorbs ultraviolet light. This prevents the light from reaching and damaging the dermis. The skin helps maintain a constant body temperature. It keeps the body cool in two ways. Sweat from sweat glands in the skin evaporates to cool the body. Blood vessels in the skin dilate, or widen, increasing blood flow to the body surface. This allows more heat to reach the surface and radiate into the environment. The opposite happens to retain body heat. Blood vessels in the skin constrict, or narrow, decreasing blood flow to the body surface. This reduces the amount of heat that reaches the surface so less heat is lost to the environment. 	when blood vessels in the skin dilate more heat reaches the body surface	true
What can you do to keep your skin healthy? The most important step you can take is to protect your skin from sun exposure. On sunny days, wear long sleeves and pants and a hat with a brim. Also apply sunscreen to exposed areas of skin. Protecting your skin in these ways will reduce damage to your skin by ultraviolet light. This is important because skin that has been damaged by ultraviolet light is at greater risk of developing skin cancer. This is true whether the damage is due to sunlight or the light in tanning beds. About 85 percent of teens develop acne, like the boy in Figure 16.9. Acne is a condition in which pimples form on the skin. It is caused by a bacterial infection. It happens when the sebaceous glands secrete too much sebum. The excess oil provides a good place for bacteria to grow. Keeping the skin clean helps prevent acne. Over-the-counter products or prescription drugs may be needed if the problem is serious or doesnt clear up on its own. 	skin damaged by ultraviolet light is at greater risk of developing cancer	true
You may spend a lot of time and money on your hair and nails. You may think of them as accessories, like clothes or jewelry. However, like the skin, the hair and nails also play important roles in helping the body maintain homeostasis. 	hair grows longer because it is made up of living cells	false
You may spend a lot of time and money on your hair and nails. You may think of them as accessories, like clothes or jewelry. However, like the skin, the hair and nails also play important roles in helping the body maintain homeostasis. 	sweat reaches the surface of the skin by traveling through hair follicles	false
You may spend a lot of time and money on your hair and nails. You may think of them as accessories, like clothes or jewelry. However, like the skin, the hair and nails also play important roles in helping the body maintain homeostasis. 	outer layer of the skin	1.e
Fingernails and toenails are made of specialized cells that grow out of the epidermis. They too are filled with keratin. The keratin makes them tough and hard. Their job is to protect the ends of the fingers and toes. They also make it easier to feel things with the sensitive fingertips by acting as a counterforce when things are handled. 	tough protein that fills hair cells	2.f
You may spend a lot of time and money on your hair and nails. You may think of them as accessories, like clothes or jewelry. However, like the skin, the hair and nails also play important roles in helping the body maintain homeostasis. 	skin structure where a hair originates	3.b
From the outside, the skin looks plain and simple, as you can see in Figure 16.5. But at a cellular level, theres nothing plain or simple about it. A single square inch of skin contains about 20 blood vessels, hundreds of sweat glands, and more than a thousand nerve endings. It also contains tens of thousands of pigment-producing cells. Clearly, there is much more to skin than meets the eye! For a dramatic introduction to the skin, watch this video: MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  The skin is only about 2 mm thick, or about as thick as the cover of a book. Although it is very thin, it consists of two distinct layers, called the epidermis and the dermis. You can see both layers and some of their structures in Figure 16.6. Refer to the figure as you read about the epidermis and dermis below. 	major organ of the integumentary system	4.g
You may spend a lot of time and money on your hair and nails. You may think of them as accessories, like clothes or jewelry. However, like the skin, the hair and nails also play important roles in helping the body maintain homeostasis. 	oily substance secreted by glands in the skin	5.c
You may spend a lot of time and money on your hair and nails. You may think of them as accessories, like clothes or jewelry. However, like the skin, the hair and nails also play important roles in helping the body maintain homeostasis. 	inner layer of the skin	6.d
You may spend a lot of time and money on your hair and nails. You may think of them as accessories, like clothes or jewelry. However, like the skin, the hair and nails also play important roles in helping the body maintain homeostasis. 	type of cell that produces a brown pigment in skin	7.a
Some people think bones are like chalk: dead, dry, and brittle. In reality, bones are very much alive. They consist of living tissues and are supplied with blood and nerves. 	bones release stored calcium to the blood as needed	true
Some people think bones are like chalk: dead, dry, and brittle. In reality, bones are very much alive. They consist of living tissues and are supplied with blood and nerves. 	bones are like chalk dead dry and brittle	false
Some people think bones are like chalk: dead, dry, and brittle. In reality, bones are very much alive. They consist of living tissues and are supplied with blood and nerves. 	bones are organs made up of four types of bone tissues	true
Bones are organs. Like other organs, they are made up of more than one kind of tissue. There are four different kinds of tissues in bones, as shown in Figure 16.11. From the outside of the bone to the center, the tissues are periosteum, compact bone, spongy bone, and bone marrow. Periosteum is a tough, fibrous membrane that covers and protects the outer surfaces of bone. Compact bone lies below periosteum. It is very dense and hard. Compact bone gives bones their strength. Spongy bone lies below compact bone. It is less dense than compact bone. Spongy bone contains many tiny holes, or pores, which provide spaces for blood vessels and bone marrow. Bone marrow is a soft connective tissue inside pores and cavities in spongy bone. Bone marrow makes blood cells. 	compact bone lies between spongy bone and periosteum	true
A joint is a place where two or more bones of the skeleton meet. There are three different types of joints based on the degree to which they allow movement of the bones: immovable, partly movable, and movable joints. Immovable joints do not allow the bones to move at all. In these joints, the bones are fused together by very tough collagen. Examples of immovable joints include the joints between bones of the skull. You can see them in Figure 16.12. Partly movable joints allow very limited movement. In these joints, the bones are held together by cartilage, which is more flexible than collagen. Examples of partly moveable joints include the bones of the rib cage. Movable joints allow the greatest movement and are the most common. In these joints, the bones are connected by ligaments. The surfaces of the bones at the joints are covered with a smooth layer of cartilage. It reduces friction between the bones when they move. The space between the bones is also filled with a liquid called synovial fluid. It helps to cushion the bones. There are several different types of movable joints. You can see three of them in Figure 16.13. Move these three joints in your own skeleton to experience the range of motion each allows. 	an example of a ballandsocket joint is the elbow	false
What you eat as a teen can affect how healthy your skeletal system is not only now but also in the future. Eating a diet with plenty of calcium and vitamin D can help keep your bones strong. If you dont get enough calcium and vitamin D in your diet as a teen, you will be more likely to develop osteoporosis when you are older. 	calcium and vitamin d are needed to keep bones strong	true
Bones are organs. Like other organs, they are made up of more than one kind of tissue. There are four different kinds of tissues in bones, as shown in Figure 16.11. From the outside of the bone to the center, the tissues are periosteum, compact bone, spongy bone, and bone marrow. Periosteum is a tough, fibrous membrane that covers and protects the outer surfaces of bone. Compact bone lies below periosteum. It is very dense and hard. Compact bone gives bones their strength. Spongy bone lies below compact bone. It is less dense than compact bone. Spongy bone contains many tiny holes, or pores, which provide spaces for blood vessels and bone marrow. Bone marrow is a soft connective tissue inside pores and cavities in spongy bone. Bone marrow makes blood cells. 	blood cells are produced by compact bone	false
Osteoporosis is a disease in which the bones become porous and weak because they do not contain enough calcium. The graph in Figure 16.14 shows how the mass of calcium in bone peaks around age 30 and declines after that, especially in women. Maximizing the calcium in your bones while youre young will reduce your risk of developing osteoporosis later in of life. 	people with osteoporosis have an increased risk of bone fractures	true
Early in the development of a human fetus, the skeleton is made entirely of cartilage. The relatively soft cartilage gradually changes to hard bone through ossification. This is a process in which mineral deposits replace cartilage in bone. At birth, several areas of cartilage remain, including the ends of the long bones in the arms and legs. This allows these bones to keep growing in length during childhood. By the late teens or early twenties, all of the cartilage has been replaced by bone. Bones cannot grow in length after this point has been reached. However, bones can continue to grow in width. They are stimulated to grow thicker when they are put under stress by muscles. Weight-bearing activities such as weight lifting can increase growth in bone width. 	by birth the human skeleton consists entirely of bone	false
Early in the development of a human fetus, the skeleton is made entirely of cartilage. The relatively soft cartilage gradually changes to hard bone through ossification. This is a process in which mineral deposits replace cartilage in bone. At birth, several areas of cartilage remain, including the ends of the long bones in the arms and legs. This allows these bones to keep growing in length during childhood. By the late teens or early twenties, all of the cartilage has been replaced by bone. Bones cannot grow in length after this point has been reached. However, bones can continue to grow in width. They are stimulated to grow thicker when they are put under stress by muscles. Weight-bearing activities such as weight lifting can increase growth in bone width. 	bones grow thicker when they are put under stress by muscles	true
People with osteoporosis have an increased risk of bone fractures. A bone fracture is a crack or break in bone. Even if you have healthy bones, you may fracture a bone if too much stress is placed on it. This could happen in a car crash or while playing a sport. Wearing a seatbelt when you ride in a motor vehicle and wearing safety gear when you play sports may help prevent bone fractures. Bone fractures heal naturally as new bone tissue forms at the site of the fracture. However, the bone may have to be placed in a cast or have rods or screws inserted into it to keep it correctly aligned until it heals. The healing process usually takes several weeks or even months. 	a sprain occurs when a bone bends but doesnt break	false
Bones are the main organs of the skeletal system. In adults, the skeleton consists of a whopping 206 bones, many of them in the hands and feet. You can see many of the bones of the human skeleton in Figure 16.10. The skeletal system also includes cartilage and ligaments. Cartilage is a tough, flexible connective tissue that contains the protein collagen. It covers the ends of bones where they meet. The gray tissue in Figure 16.10 is cartilage. A ligament is a band of fibrous connective tissue. Ligaments connect bones of the skeleton and hold them together. 	the adult skeletal system contains 206 bones	true
Bones are organs. Like other organs, they are made up of more than one kind of tissue. There are four different kinds of tissues in bones, as shown in Figure 16.11. From the outside of the bone to the center, the tissues are periosteum, compact bone, spongy bone, and bone marrow. Periosteum is a tough, fibrous membrane that covers and protects the outer surfaces of bone. Compact bone lies below periosteum. It is very dense and hard. Compact bone gives bones their strength. Spongy bone lies below compact bone. It is less dense than compact bone. Spongy bone contains many tiny holes, or pores, which provide spaces for blood vessels and bone marrow. Bone marrow is a soft connective tissue inside pores and cavities in spongy bone. Bone marrow makes blood cells. 	type of bone tissue that contains many tiny pores	1.d
Bones are organs. Like other organs, they are made up of more than one kind of tissue. There are four different kinds of tissues in bones, as shown in Figure 16.11. From the outside of the bone to the center, the tissues are periosteum, compact bone, spongy bone, and bone marrow. Periosteum is a tough, fibrous membrane that covers and protects the outer surfaces of bone. Compact bone lies below periosteum. It is very dense and hard. Compact bone gives bones their strength. Spongy bone lies below compact bone. It is less dense than compact bone. Spongy bone contains many tiny holes, or pores, which provide spaces for blood vessels and bone marrow. Bone marrow is a soft connective tissue inside pores and cavities in spongy bone. Bone marrow makes blood cells. 	tough fibrous tissue that forms the outer layer of bone	2.e
Bones are organs. Like other organs, they are made up of more than one kind of tissue. There are four different kinds of tissues in bones, as shown in Figure 16.11. From the outside of the bone to the center, the tissues are periosteum, compact bone, spongy bone, and bone marrow. Periosteum is a tough, fibrous membrane that covers and protects the outer surfaces of bone. Compact bone lies below periosteum. It is very dense and hard. Compact bone gives bones their strength. Spongy bone lies below compact bone. It is less dense than compact bone. Spongy bone contains many tiny holes, or pores, which provide spaces for blood vessels and bone marrow. Bone marrow is a soft connective tissue inside pores and cavities in spongy bone. Bone marrow makes blood cells. 	type of bone tissue that is very dense and hard	3.a
Bones are the main organs of the skeletal system. In adults, the skeleton consists of a whopping 206 bones, many of them in the hands and feet. You can see many of the bones of the human skeleton in Figure 16.10. The skeletal system also includes cartilage and ligaments. Cartilage is a tough, flexible connective tissue that contains the protein collagen. It covers the ends of bones where they meet. The gray tissue in Figure 16.10 is cartilage. A ligament is a band of fibrous connective tissue. Ligaments connect bones of the skeleton and hold them together. 	band of fibrous tissue that holds bones together	4.f
Bones are organs. Like other organs, they are made up of more than one kind of tissue. There are four different kinds of tissues in bones, as shown in Figure 16.11. From the outside of the bone to the center, the tissues are periosteum, compact bone, spongy bone, and bone marrow. Periosteum is a tough, fibrous membrane that covers and protects the outer surfaces of bone. Compact bone lies below periosteum. It is very dense and hard. Compact bone gives bones their strength. Spongy bone lies below compact bone. It is less dense than compact bone. Spongy bone contains many tiny holes, or pores, which provide spaces for blood vessels and bone marrow. Bone marrow is a soft connective tissue inside pores and cavities in spongy bone. Bone marrow makes blood cells. 	soft tissue inside spongy bone that makes blood cells	5.g
Bones are the main organs of the skeletal system. In adults, the skeleton consists of a whopping 206 bones, many of them in the hands and feet. You can see many of the bones of the human skeleton in Figure 16.10. The skeletal system also includes cartilage and ligaments. Cartilage is a tough, flexible connective tissue that contains the protein collagen. It covers the ends of bones where they meet. The gray tissue in Figure 16.10 is cartilage. A ligament is a band of fibrous connective tissue. Ligaments connect bones of the skeleton and hold them together. 	tough flexible connective tissue containing collagen	6.c
Early in the development of a human fetus, the skeleton is made entirely of cartilage. The relatively soft cartilage gradually changes to hard bone through ossification. This is a process in which mineral deposits replace cartilage in bone. At birth, several areas of cartilage remain, including the ends of the long bones in the arms and legs. This allows these bones to keep growing in length during childhood. By the late teens or early twenties, all of the cartilage has been replaced by bone. Bones cannot grow in length after this point has been reached. However, bones can continue to grow in width. They are stimulated to grow thicker when they are put under stress by muscles. Weight-bearing activities such as weight lifting can increase growth in bone width. 	process in which cartilage changes to bone	7.b
The human body has more than 600 skeletal muscles. You can see some of them in Figure 16.18. A few of the larger muscles are labeled in the figure. 	organelle that allows muscles to contract	1.f
There are three different types of muscle tissue in the human body: cardiac, smooth, and skeletal muscle tissues. All three types consist mainly of muscle fibers, but the fibers have different arrangements. You can see how each type of muscle tissue looks in Figure 16.17. Cardiac muscle is found only in the walls of the heart. It is striated, or striped, because its muscle fibers are arranged in bundles. Contractions of cardiac muscle are involuntary. This means that they are not under conscious control. When cardiac muscle contracts, the heart beats and pumps blood. Smooth muscle is found in the walls of other internal organs such as the stomach. It isnt striated because its muscle fibers are arranged in sheets rather than bundles. Contractions of smooth muscle are involuntary. When smooth muscles in the stomach contract, they squeeze food inside the stomach. This helps break the food into smaller pieces. Skeletal muscle is attached to the bones of the skeleton. It is striated like cardiac muscle because its muscle fibers are arranged in bundles. Contractions of skeletal muscle are voluntary. This means that they are under conscious control. Whether you are doing pushups or pushing a pencil, you are using skeletal muscles. Skeletal muscles are the most common type of muscles in the body. You can read more about them below. 	muscle found in the walls of internal organs except the heart	2.c
You can see the bundles of muscle fibers that make up a skeletal muscle in Figure 16.19. You can also see in the figure how the muscle is attached to a bone by a tendon. Tendons are tough connective tissues that anchor skeletal muscles to bones throughout the body. Many skeletal muscles are attached to the ends of bones where they meet at a joint. The muscles span the joint and connect the bones. When the muscles contract, they pull on the bones, causing them to move. 	tough connective tissue that attaches muscle to bone	3.e
Muscles are the main organs of the muscular system. Muscles are composed primarily of cells called muscle fibers. A muscle fiber is a very long, thin cell, as you can see in Figure 16.16. It contains multiple nuclei and many mitochondria, which produce ATP for energy. It also contains many organelles called myofibrils. Myofibrils allow muscles to contract, or shorten. Muscle contractions are responsible for virtually all the movements of the body, both inside and out. 	long thin muscle cell	4.d
You are less likely to have a muscle injury if you exercise regularly and have strong muscles. Stretching also helps prevent muscle injuries. Stretching improves the range of motion of muscles and tendons at joints. You should always warm up before stretching or doing any type of exercise. Warmed-up muscles and tendons are less likely to be injured. One way to warm up is to jog slowly for a few minutes. 	muscle found in the walls of the heart	5.b
Muscles can only contract. They cant actively lengthen. Therefore, to move bones back and forth at a joint, skeletal muscles must work in pairs. For example, the bicep and triceps muscles of the upper arm work as a pair. You can see how this pair of muscles works in Figure 16.20. When the bicep muscle contracts, it bends the arm at the elbow. When the triceps muscle contracts, it straightens the arm. 	protein filament that slides over another when a muscle contracts	6.a
You are less likely to have a muscle injury if you exercise regularly and have strong muscles. Stretching also helps prevent muscle injuries. Stretching improves the range of motion of muscles and tendons at joints. You should always warm up before stretching or doing any type of exercise. Warmed-up muscles and tendons are less likely to be injured. One way to warm up is to jog slowly for a few minutes. 	most common type of muscle in the body	7.g
Muscles are the main organs of the muscular system. Muscles are composed primarily of cells called muscle fibers. A muscle fiber is a very long, thin cell, as you can see in Figure 16.16. It contains multiple nuclei and many mitochondria, which produce ATP for energy. It also contains many organelles called myofibrils. Myofibrils allow muscles to contract, or shorten. Muscle contractions are responsible for virtually all the movements of the body, both inside and out. 	the human heart is composed almost completely of muscle	true
Muscles can only contract. They cant actively lengthen. Therefore, to move bones back and forth at a joint, skeletal muscles must work in pairs. For example, the bicep and triceps muscles of the upper arm work as a pair. You can see how this pair of muscles works in Figure 16.20. When the bicep muscle contracts, it bends the arm at the elbow. When the triceps muscle contracts, it straightens the arm. 	when a muscle contracts it gets longer	false
To understand how a muscle contracts, you need to dive deeper into the structure of muscle fibers. You can see in Figure 16.16 that a muscle fiber is full of myofibrils. Each myofibril is made up of two types of proteins, called actin and myosin. These proteins form thread-like filaments. The myosin filaments use energy from ATP to pull on the actin filaments. This causes the actin filaments to slide over the myosin filaments and shorten a section of the myofibril. You can see a simple animation of the process at this link: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Actin_Myosin.gif The sliding-and-shortening process occurs all along many myofibrils and in many muscle fibers. It causes the muscle fibers to shorten and the muscle to contract. 	actin filaments slide over myosin filaments when a muscle contracts	true
The human body has more than 600 skeletal muscles. You can see some of them in Figure 16.18. A few of the larger muscles are labeled in the figure. 	contractions of skeletal muscles are involuntary	false
Exercising muscles increases their size, and bigger muscles have greater strength. What type of exercises should you do? For all-round muscular health, you should do two basic types of exercise. To increase the size and strength of skeletal muscles, you need to make these muscles contract against a resisting force. For example, you can do sit-ups or pushups, where the resisting force is your own body weight. You can see another way to do it in Figure 16.21. To exercise cardiac muscle and increase muscle endurance, you need to do aerobic exercise. Aerobic exercise increases the size and strength of muscles in the heart and helps all your muscles develop greater endurance. This means they can work longer without getting tired. Aerobic exercise is any exercise such as running, biking, or swimming that causes an increase in your heart rate. You can see another example of aerobic exercise in Figure 16.22. Lifting weights is one way to pit skeletal muscles against a resisting force. Snowshoeing is a fun way to get aerobic exercise. 	weightbearing exercises increase muscle strength	true
You can see the bundles of muscle fibers that make up a skeletal muscle in Figure 16.19. You can also see in the figure how the muscle is attached to a bone by a tendon. Tendons are tough connective tissues that anchor skeletal muscles to bones throughout the body. Many skeletal muscles are attached to the ends of bones where they meet at a joint. The muscles span the joint and connect the bones. When the muscles contract, they pull on the bones, causing them to move. 	there are four different types of muscle tissues in the human body	false
Exercising muscles increases their size, and bigger muscles have greater strength. What type of exercises should you do? For all-round muscular health, you should do two basic types of exercise. To increase the size and strength of skeletal muscles, you need to make these muscles contract against a resisting force. For example, you can do sit-ups or pushups, where the resisting force is your own body weight. You can see another way to do it in Figure 16.21. To exercise cardiac muscle and increase muscle endurance, you need to do aerobic exercise. Aerobic exercise increases the size and strength of muscles in the heart and helps all your muscles develop greater endurance. This means they can work longer without getting tired. Aerobic exercise is any exercise such as running, biking, or swimming that causes an increase in your heart rate. You can see another example of aerobic exercise in Figure 16.22. Lifting weights is one way to pit skeletal muscles against a resisting force. Snowshoeing is a fun way to get aerobic exercise. 	aerobic exercise increases muscle endurance	true
You can see the bundles of muscle fibers that make up a skeletal muscle in Figure 16.19. You can also see in the figure how the muscle is attached to a bone by a tendon. Tendons are tough connective tissues that anchor skeletal muscles to bones throughout the body. Many skeletal muscles are attached to the ends of bones where they meet at a joint. The muscles span the joint and connect the bones. When the muscles contract, they pull on the bones, causing them to move. 	tendons attach one bone to another at a joint	false
The human body has more than 600 skeletal muscles. You can see some of them in Figure 16.18. A few of the larger muscles are labeled in the figure. 	skeletal muscles work in pairs	true
Muscles can only contract. They cant actively lengthen. Therefore, to move bones back and forth at a joint, skeletal muscles must work in pairs. For example, the bicep and triceps muscles of the upper arm work as a pair. You can see how this pair of muscles works in Figure 16.20. When the bicep muscle contracts, it bends the arm at the elbow. When the triceps muscle contracts, it straightens the arm. 	the quadriceps is a muscle in the upper arm	false
Exercising muscles increases their size, and bigger muscles have greater strength. What type of exercises should you do? For all-round muscular health, you should do two basic types of exercise. To increase the size and strength of skeletal muscles, you need to make these muscles contract against a resisting force. For example, you can do sit-ups or pushups, where the resisting force is your own body weight. You can see another way to do it in Figure 16.21. To exercise cardiac muscle and increase muscle endurance, you need to do aerobic exercise. Aerobic exercise increases the size and strength of muscles in the heart and helps all your muscles develop greater endurance. This means they can work longer without getting tired. Aerobic exercise is any exercise such as running, biking, or swimming that causes an increase in your heart rate. You can see another example of aerobic exercise in Figure 16.22. Lifting weights is one way to pit skeletal muscles against a resisting force. Snowshoeing is a fun way to get aerobic exercise. 	situps and pushups increase muscle size and strength	true
Muscles are the main organs of the muscular system. Muscles are composed primarily of cells called muscle fibers. A muscle fiber is a very long, thin cell, as you can see in Figure 16.16. It contains multiple nuclei and many mitochondria, which produce ATP for energy. It also contains many organelles called myofibrils. Myofibrils allow muscles to contract, or shorten. Muscle contractions are responsible for virtually all the movements of the body, both inside and out. 	muscle contractions are responsible for virtually all movements of the body	true
Lipids are nutrients such as fats. They are used for energy and other important purposes. One gram of lipids provides the body with 9 Calories of energy, more than twice as much as carbohydrates or proteins. Lipids also make up cell membranes, protect nerves, control blood pressure, and help blood clot. You must consume some lipids for these purposes. Good food sources of lipids are shown in Figure 17.4. Any extra lipids you consume are stored as fat. A certain amount of stored fat is needed to cushion and protect internal organs and insulate the body. However, too much stored fat can lead to obesity and cause significant health problems. A type of lipid called trans fat is found in many processed foods. Trans fat is rare in nature but is manufactured and added to foods to preserve freshness. Eating foods that contain trans fat increases the risk of heart disease. Trans fat may be found in such foods as cookies, doughnuts, crackers, fried foods, ground beef, and margarine. 	state in which the body does not contain enough water	1.d
Macronutrients are nutrients the body needs in relatively large amounts. They include carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, and water. 	any nutrient the body needs in relatively small amounts	2.f
Macronutrients are nutrients the body needs in relatively large amounts. They include carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, and water. 	chemical element needed in small amounts for normal functioning of the body	3.g
Lipids are nutrients such as fats. They are used for energy and other important purposes. One gram of lipids provides the body with 9 Calories of energy, more than twice as much as carbohydrates or proteins. Lipids also make up cell membranes, protect nerves, control blood pressure, and help blood clot. You must consume some lipids for these purposes. Good food sources of lipids are shown in Figure 17.4. Any extra lipids you consume are stored as fat. A certain amount of stored fat is needed to cushion and protect internal organs and insulate the body. However, too much stored fat can lead to obesity and cause significant health problems. A type of lipid called trans fat is found in many processed foods. Trans fat is rare in nature but is manufactured and added to foods to preserve freshness. Eating foods that contain trans fat increases the risk of heart disease. Trans fat may be found in such foods as cookies, doughnuts, crackers, fried foods, ground beef, and margarine. 	artificial lipid added to foods to preserve freshness	4.a
Macronutrients are nutrients the body needs in relatively large amounts. They include carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, and water. 	any nutrient the body needs in relatively large amounts	5.b
Proteins are nutrients made up of smaller molecules called amino acids. The digestive system breaks down proteins in food to amino acids, which are used for protein synthesis. Proteins synthesized from the amino acids in food serve many vital functions. They make up muscles, control body processes, fight infections, and carry substances in the blood. If you eat more protein than you need for these functions, the extra protein is used for energy. One gram of protein provides 4 Calories of energy, the same as carbohydrates. A 13-year-old needs to eat about 34 grams of protein a day. Figure 17.3 shows good food sources of protein. 	nutrient made up of amino acids	6.e
Carbohydrates include sugars, starches, and fiber. Sugars and starches are used by the body for energy. One gram of sugar or starch provides 4 Calories of energy. Fiber doesnt provide energy, but it is needed for other uses. At age 13 years, you need about 130 grams of carbohydrates a day. Figure 17.2 shows good food sources of each type. Sugars are small, simple carbohydrates. They are found in foods such as milk and fruit. Sugars in foods such as these are broken down by your digestive system to glucose, the simplest of all sugars. Glucose is taken up by cells for energy. Starches are larger, complex carbohydrates. They are found in foods such as grains and vegetables. Starches are broken down by your digestive system to glucose, which is used for energy. Fiber is a complex carbohydrate that consists mainly of cellulose and comes only from plants. High-fiber foods include whole grains and legumes such as beans. Fiber cant be broken down by the digestive system, but it plays important roles in the body. It helps keep sugar and lipids at normal levels in the blood. It also helps keep food waste moist so it can pass easily out of the body. 	sugar starch or fiber	7. c
Micronutrients are nutrients the body needs in relatively small amounts. They include minerals and vitamins. These nutrients dont provide the body with energy, but they are still essential for good health. 	all nutrients provide the body with energy	false
The vitamins to watch out for are A, D, E, and K. These vitamins are stored by the body, so they can build up to high levels. 	your body cannot produce any of the vitamins it needs	false
Minerals are chemical elements that dont come from living things or include the element carbon. Many minerals are needed in the diet for normal functioning of the body. Several minerals that are needed in relatively large amounts are listed in Table 17.1. As you can see from these examples, minerals have a diversity of important functions. Your body cant produce any of the minerals it needs, so you must get them from the food you eat. The table shows good food sources of the minerals. Mineral Calcium Chloride Magnesium Phosphorus Potassium Sodium Function strong bones and teeth salt-water balance strong bones strong bones and teeth muscle and nerve functions muscle and nerve functions Good Food Sources milk, green leafy vegetables table salt, most packaged foods whole grains, nuts poultry, whole grains meat, bananas table salt, most packaged foods Not getting enough minerals can cause health problems. For example, not getting enough calcium may cause osteoporosis. This is a disease in which the bones become porous so they break easily. Getting too much of some minerals can also cause health problems. Many people get too much sodium. Sodium is added to most packaged foods. People often add more sodium to their food by using table salt. Too much sodium has been linked to high blood pressure in some people. 	the mineral sodium is needed for normal muscle function	true
The vitamins to watch out for are A, D, E, and K. These vitamins are stored by the body, so they can build up to high levels. 	vitamin k is needed for normal nerve function	false
Micronutrients are nutrients the body needs in relatively small amounts. They include minerals and vitamins. These nutrients dont provide the body with energy, but they are still essential for good health. 	proteins can provide the body with energy	true
Micronutrients are nutrients the body needs in relatively small amounts. They include minerals and vitamins. These nutrients dont provide the body with energy, but they are still essential for good health. 	all carbohydrates provide the body with energy	false
The vitamins to watch out for are A, D, E, and K. These vitamins are stored by the body, so they can build up to high levels. 	fiber helps keep sugar and lipids at normal levels in the blood	true
Macronutrients are nutrients the body needs in relatively large amounts. They include carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, and water. 	carbohydrates and proteins provide 4 calories of energy per gram	true
Lipids are nutrients such as fats. They are used for energy and other important purposes. One gram of lipids provides the body with 9 Calories of energy, more than twice as much as carbohydrates or proteins. Lipids also make up cell membranes, protect nerves, control blood pressure, and help blood clot. You must consume some lipids for these purposes. Good food sources of lipids are shown in Figure 17.4. Any extra lipids you consume are stored as fat. A certain amount of stored fat is needed to cushion and protect internal organs and insulate the body. However, too much stored fat can lead to obesity and cause significant health problems. A type of lipid called trans fat is found in many processed foods. Trans fat is rare in nature but is manufactured and added to foods to preserve freshness. Eating foods that contain trans fat increases the risk of heart disease. Trans fat may be found in such foods as cookies, doughnuts, crackers, fried foods, ground beef, and margarine. 	eating trans fats can increase the risk of heart disease	true
Micronutrients are nutrients the body needs in relatively small amounts. They include minerals and vitamins. These nutrients dont provide the body with energy, but they are still essential for good health. 	your body can produce some of the minerals it needs	false
Minerals are chemical elements that dont come from living things or include the element carbon. Many minerals are needed in the diet for normal functioning of the body. Several minerals that are needed in relatively large amounts are listed in Table 17.1. As you can see from these examples, minerals have a diversity of important functions. Your body cant produce any of the minerals it needs, so you must get them from the food you eat. The table shows good food sources of the minerals. Mineral Calcium Chloride Magnesium Phosphorus Potassium Sodium Function strong bones and teeth salt-water balance strong bones strong bones and teeth muscle and nerve functions muscle and nerve functions Good Food Sources milk, green leafy vegetables table salt, most packaged foods whole grains, nuts poultry, whole grains meat, bananas table salt, most packaged foods Not getting enough minerals can cause health problems. For example, not getting enough calcium may cause osteoporosis. This is a disease in which the bones become porous so they break easily. Getting too much of some minerals can also cause health problems. Many people get too much sodium. Sodium is added to most packaged foods. People often add more sodium to their food by using table salt. Too much sodium has been linked to high blood pressure in some people. 	potassium is needed for strong bones and teeth	false
Minerals are chemical elements that dont come from living things or include the element carbon. Many minerals are needed in the diet for normal functioning of the body. Several minerals that are needed in relatively large amounts are listed in Table 17.1. As you can see from these examples, minerals have a diversity of important functions. Your body cant produce any of the minerals it needs, so you must get them from the food you eat. The table shows good food sources of the minerals. Mineral Calcium Chloride Magnesium Phosphorus Potassium Sodium Function strong bones and teeth salt-water balance strong bones strong bones and teeth muscle and nerve functions muscle and nerve functions Good Food Sources milk, green leafy vegetables table salt, most packaged foods whole grains, nuts poultry, whole grains meat, bananas table salt, most packaged foods Not getting enough minerals can cause health problems. For example, not getting enough calcium may cause osteoporosis. This is a disease in which the bones become porous so they break easily. Getting too much of some minerals can also cause health problems. Many people get too much sodium. Sodium is added to most packaged foods. People often add more sodium to their food by using table salt. Too much sodium has been linked to high blood pressure in some people. 	vitamin b12 is needed for normal nerve function	true
Chemical digestion could not take place without the help of digestive enzymes and other substances secreted into the GI tract. An enzyme is a protein that speeds up a biochemical reaction. Digestive enzymes speed up the reactions of chemical digestion. Table 17.3 lists a few digestive enzymes, the organs that produce them, and their functions in digestion. Enzyme Amylase Pepsin Organ that Produces It mouth stomach Substance It Helps Digest starch protein Enzyme Lipase Ribonuclease Organ that Produces It pancreas pancreas Substance It Helps Digest fat RNA Most digestive enzymes are secreted into the GI tract by organs of the GI tract or from a nearby gland named the pancreas. Figure 17.12 shows where the pancreas is located. The figure also shows the locations of the liver and gall bladder. These organs produce or store other digestive secretions. The liver secretes bile acids. Bile acids help digest fat. Some liver bile is secreted directly into the small intestine. Some liver bile goes to the gall bladder. This sac-like organ stores and concentrates the liver bile before releasing it into the small intestine. 	the gall bladder stores bile acids from the liver	true
Some substances in food cant be broken down into nutrients. They remain behind in the digestive system after the nutrients have been absorbed. Any substances in food that cant be digested pass out of the body as solid waste. This process is called elimination. 	food moves through the digestive tract by gravity	false
Does the sight or smell of your favorite food make your mouth water? When this happens, you are getting ready for digestion. 	digestive enzymes speed up mechanical digestion	false
Chemical digestion could not take place without the help of digestive enzymes and other substances secreted into the GI tract. An enzyme is a protein that speeds up a biochemical reaction. Digestive enzymes speed up the reactions of chemical digestion. Table 17.3 lists a few digestive enzymes, the organs that produce them, and their functions in digestion. Enzyme Amylase Pepsin Organ that Produces It mouth stomach Substance It Helps Digest starch protein Enzyme Lipase Ribonuclease Organ that Produces It pancreas pancreas Substance It Helps Digest fat RNA Most digestive enzymes are secreted into the GI tract by organs of the GI tract or from a nearby gland named the pancreas. Figure 17.12 shows where the pancreas is located. The figure also shows the locations of the liver and gall bladder. These organs produce or store other digestive secretions. The liver secretes bile acids. Bile acids help digest fat. Some liver bile is secreted directly into the small intestine. Some liver bile goes to the gall bladder. This sac-like organ stores and concentrates the liver bile before releasing it into the small intestine. 	lipase is an enzyme that helps digest fat	true
After food is broken down into nutrient molecules, the molecules are absorbed by the blood. Absorption is the process in which nutrients or other molecules are taken up by the blood. Once absorbed by the blood, nutrients can travel in the bloodstream to cells throughout the body. 	absorption takes place only in the small intestine	false
The digestive system is the body system that breaks down food and absorbs nutrients. It also eliminates solid food wastes that remain after food is digested. The major organs of the digestive system are shown in Figure 17.10. For an entertaining overview of the digestive system and how it works, watch this video:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	all the organs of the digestive system are part of the gi tract	false
Some substances in food cant be broken down into nutrients. They remain behind in the digestive system after the nutrients have been absorbed. Any substances in food that cant be digested pass out of the body as solid waste. This process is called elimination. 	after food is digested and its nutrients absorbed the only thing that remains in the gi tract is water	false
Chemical digestion could not take place without the help of digestive enzymes and other substances secreted into the GI tract. An enzyme is a protein that speeds up a biochemical reaction. Digestive enzymes speed up the reactions of chemical digestion. Table 17.3 lists a few digestive enzymes, the organs that produce them, and their functions in digestion. Enzyme Amylase Pepsin Organ that Produces It mouth stomach Substance It Helps Digest starch protein Enzyme Lipase Ribonuclease Organ that Produces It pancreas pancreas Substance It Helps Digest fat RNA Most digestive enzymes are secreted into the GI tract by organs of the GI tract or from a nearby gland named the pancreas. Figure 17.12 shows where the pancreas is located. The figure also shows the locations of the liver and gall bladder. These organs produce or store other digestive secretions. The liver secretes bile acids. Bile acids help digest fat. Some liver bile is secreted directly into the small intestine. Some liver bile goes to the gall bladder. This sac-like organ stores and concentrates the liver bile before releasing it into the small intestine. 	one function of the gall bladder is to make bile acids more concentrated	true
Some substances in food cant be broken down into nutrients. They remain behind in the digestive system after the nutrients have been absorbed. Any substances in food that cant be digested pass out of the body as solid waste. This process is called elimination. 	substances that can be absorbed from the stomach include water and salt	true
The large intestine is a wide tube that connects the small intestine with the anus. In adults, the large intestine is about 1.5 meters (5 feet) long. It is larger in width but shorter in length than the small intestine. 	the large intestine is much longer than the small intestine	false
Does the sight or smell of your favorite food make your mouth water? When this happens, you are getting ready for digestion. 	the part of the small intestine where most digestion takes place is the ileum	false
Food poisoning is the common term for foodborne illness. This type of illness occurs when harmful bacteria enter your digestive system in food and make you sick. The bacteriaor toxins they producemay cause cramping, vomiting, or other GI tract symptoms. Following these healthy practices may decrease your risk of foodborne illness: Wash your hands after handling raw foods such as meats, poultry, fish, or eggs. These foods often contain bacteria that your hands could transfer to your mouth. Cook meats, poultry, fish, or eggs thoroughly before eating them. The heat of cooking kills any bacteria the foods may contain so they cant make you sick. Keep hot foods hot and cold foods cold. This is especially important when food is packed for lunch or a picnic (see Figure 17.15). Maintaining the proper temperature slows the growth of bacteria in the food. 	foodborne illness is the common term for a food allergy	false
As food is pushed through the GI tract by peristalsis, it undergoes digestion. Digestion is the process of breaking down food into nutrients. There are two types of digestion: mechanical digestion and chemical digestion. Mechanical digestion occurs when large chunks of food are broken down into smaller pieces. This is a physical process that happens mainly in the mouth and stomach. Chemical digestion occurs when large food molecules are broken down into smaller nutrient molecules. This is a chemical process that begins in the mouth and stomach but occurs mainly in the small intestine. 	breaking down of large chunks of food into smaller pieces	1.g
Some substances in food cant be broken down into nutrients. They remain behind in the digestive system after the nutrients have been absorbed. Any substances in food that cant be digested pass out of the body as solid waste. This process is called elimination. 	passage of solid food waste out of the body	2.e
The esophagus is a long, narrow tube that carries food from the pharynx to the stomach. It has no other purpose. Food moves through the esophagus because of peristalsis. At the lower end of the esophagus, a circular muscle, called a sphincter, controls the opening to the stomach. The sphincter relaxes to let food pass into the stomach. Then the sphincter contracts to prevent food from passing back into the esophagus. 	organ that carries food from the pharynx to the stomach	3.f
Chemical digestion could not take place without the help of digestive enzymes and other substances secreted into the GI tract. An enzyme is a protein that speeds up a biochemical reaction. Digestive enzymes speed up the reactions of chemical digestion. Table 17.3 lists a few digestive enzymes, the organs that produce them, and their functions in digestion. Enzyme Amylase Pepsin Organ that Produces It mouth stomach Substance It Helps Digest starch protein Enzyme Lipase Ribonuclease Organ that Produces It pancreas pancreas Substance It Helps Digest fat RNA Most digestive enzymes are secreted into the GI tract by organs of the GI tract or from a nearby gland named the pancreas. Figure 17.12 shows where the pancreas is located. The figure also shows the locations of the liver and gall bladder. These organs produce or store other digestive secretions. The liver secretes bile acids. Bile acids help digest fat. Some liver bile is secreted directly into the small intestine. Some liver bile goes to the gall bladder. This sac-like organ stores and concentrates the liver bile before releasing it into the small intestine. 	organ than secretes lipase and ribonuclease	4.a
Does the sight or smell of your favorite food make your mouth water? When this happens, you are getting ready for digestion. 	organs of the digestive system through which food actually passes as it undergoes digestion	5.b
After food is broken down into nutrient molecules, the molecules are absorbed by the blood. Absorption is the process in which nutrients or other molecules are taken up by the blood. Once absorbed by the blood, nutrients can travel in the bloodstream to cells throughout the body. 	breaking down of large food molecules into smaller nutrient molecules	6.c
Chemical digestion could not take place without the help of digestive enzymes and other substances secreted into the GI tract. An enzyme is a protein that speeds up a biochemical reaction. Digestive enzymes speed up the reactions of chemical digestion. Table 17.3 lists a few digestive enzymes, the organs that produce them, and their functions in digestion. Enzyme Amylase Pepsin Organ that Produces It mouth stomach Substance It Helps Digest starch protein Enzyme Lipase Ribonuclease Organ that Produces It pancreas pancreas Substance It Helps Digest fat RNA Most digestive enzymes are secreted into the GI tract by organs of the GI tract or from a nearby gland named the pancreas. Figure 17.12 shows where the pancreas is located. The figure also shows the locations of the liver and gall bladder. These organs produce or store other digestive secretions. The liver secretes bile acids. Bile acids help digest fat. Some liver bile is secreted directly into the small intestine. Some liver bile goes to the gall bladder. This sac-like organ stores and concentrates the liver bile before releasing it into the small intestine. 	organ that secretes bile acids	7.d
Pulmonary circulation is the shorter loop of the cardiovascular system. It carries blood between the heart and lungs. Oxygen-poor blood flows from the heart to the lungs. In the lungs, the blood absorbs oxygen and releases carbon dioxide. Then the oxygen-rich blood returns to the heart. 	shorter of two loops that make up the cardiovascular system	1. a
The organs that make up the cardiovascular system are the heart and a network of blood vessels that run throughout the body. The blood in the cardiovascular system is a liquid connective tissue. Figure 18.1 shows the heart and major vessels through which blood flows in the system. The heart is basically a pump that keeps blood moving through the blood vessels. 	major function of the cardiovascular system	2. g
The organs that make up the cardiovascular system are the heart and a network of blood vessels that run throughout the body. The blood in the cardiovascular system is a liquid connective tissue. Figure 18.1 shows the heart and major vessels through which blood flows in the system. The heart is basically a pump that keeps blood moving through the blood vessels. 	system comprised of the heart blood vessels and blood	3. d
Systemic circulation is the longer loop of the cardiovascular system. It carries blood between the heart and the rest of the body. Oxygen-rich blood flows from the heart to cells throughout the body. As it passes cells, the blood releases oxygen and absorbs carbon dioxide. Then the oxygen-poor blood returns to the heart. 	longer of two loops that make up the cardiovascular system	4.e
The organs that make up the cardiovascular system are the heart and a network of blood vessels that run throughout the body. The blood in the cardiovascular system is a liquid connective tissue. Figure 18.1 shows the heart and major vessels through which blood flows in the system. The heart is basically a pump that keeps blood moving through the blood vessels. 	fistsized organ that pumps blood	5.f
Pulmonary circulation is the shorter loop of the cardiovascular system. It carries blood between the heart and lungs. Oxygen-poor blood flows from the heart to the lungs. In the lungs, the blood absorbs oxygen and releases carbon dioxide. Then the oxygen-rich blood returns to the heart. 	tubular organ that carries blood	6.c
The organs that make up the cardiovascular system are the heart and a network of blood vessels that run throughout the body. The blood in the cardiovascular system is a liquid connective tissue. Figure 18.1 shows the heart and major vessels through which blood flows in the system. The heart is basically a pump that keeps blood moving through the blood vessels. 	liquid connective tissue	7.b
The organs that make up the cardiovascular system are the heart and a network of blood vessels that run throughout the body. The blood in the cardiovascular system is a liquid connective tissue. Figure 18.1 shows the heart and major vessels through which blood flows in the system. The heart is basically a pump that keeps blood moving through the blood vessels. 	organs of the cardiovascular system include the heart blood vessels and lungs	false
The main function of the cardiovascular system is transporting substances around the body. Figure 18.1 shows some of the substances that are transported in the blood. They include hormones, oxygen, nutrients from digested food, and cellular wastes. Transport of all these materials is necessary to maintain homeostasis of the body and life itself. The cardiovascular system also helps regulate body temperature by controlling where blood moves around the body. Blood is warm, so when more blood flows to the surface of the body, it warms the surface. This allows the body to lose excess heat from the surface. When less blood flows to the surface, it cools the surface. This allows the body to conserve heat and stay warm. You can see the role of blood vessels in the regulation of body temperature in this video:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the cardiovascular system helps maintain homeostasis by regulating body temperature	true
Pulmonary circulation is the shorter loop of the cardiovascular system. It carries blood between the heart and lungs. Oxygen-poor blood flows from the heart to the lungs. In the lungs, the blood absorbs oxygen and releases carbon dioxide. Then the oxygen-rich blood returns to the heart. 	oxygenrich blood flows from the heart to the lungs	false
The heart and blood vessels form a closed system through which blood keeps circulating. However, blood actually circulates in two different loops within this closed system. The two loops are called pulmonary circulation and systemic circulation. In both loops, blood passes through the heart. You can see a simple model of each circulation loop in Figure 18.2. As blood circulates through the body, it travels first through one loop and then the other loop, over and over again. 	blood that flows through the systemic circulation never flows through the pulmonary circulation	false
The main function of the cardiovascular system is transporting substances around the body. Figure 18.1 shows some of the substances that are transported in the blood. They include hormones, oxygen, nutrients from digested food, and cellular wastes. Transport of all these materials is necessary to maintain homeostasis of the body and life itself. The cardiovascular system also helps regulate body temperature by controlling where blood moves around the body. Blood is warm, so when more blood flows to the surface of the body, it warms the surface. This allows the body to lose excess heat from the surface. When less blood flows to the surface, it cools the surface. This allows the body to conserve heat and stay warm. You can see the role of blood vessels in the regulation of body temperature in this video:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	substances transported by the blood include hormones and nutrients	true
The organs that make up the cardiovascular system are the heart and a network of blood vessels that run throughout the body. The blood in the cardiovascular system is a liquid connective tissue. Figure 18.1 shows the heart and major vessels through which blood flows in the system. The heart is basically a pump that keeps blood moving through the blood vessels. 	nutrients are absorbed by the blood mainly in the small intestine	true
The main function of the cardiovascular system is transporting substances around the body. Figure 18.1 shows some of the substances that are transported in the blood. They include hormones, oxygen, nutrients from digested food, and cellular wastes. Transport of all these materials is necessary to maintain homeostasis of the body and life itself. The cardiovascular system also helps regulate body temperature by controlling where blood moves around the body. Blood is warm, so when more blood flows to the surface of the body, it warms the surface. This allows the body to lose excess heat from the surface. When less blood flows to the surface, it cools the surface. This allows the body to conserve heat and stay warm. You can see the role of blood vessels in the regulation of body temperature in this video:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	transport of substances by the cardiovascular system is necessary for homeostasis	true
The main function of the cardiovascular system is transporting substances around the body. Figure 18.1 shows some of the substances that are transported in the blood. They include hormones, oxygen, nutrients from digested food, and cellular wastes. Transport of all these materials is necessary to maintain homeostasis of the body and life itself. The cardiovascular system also helps regulate body temperature by controlling where blood moves around the body. Blood is warm, so when more blood flows to the surface of the body, it warms the surface. This allows the body to lose excess heat from the surface. When less blood flows to the surface, it cools the surface. This allows the body to conserve heat and stay warm. You can see the role of blood vessels in the regulation of body temperature in this video:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	when less blood flows to the body surface it allows the body to lose excess heat	false
The heart and blood vessels form a closed system through which blood keeps circulating. However, blood actually circulates in two different loops within this closed system. The two loops are called pulmonary circulation and systemic circulation. In both loops, blood passes through the heart. You can see a simple model of each circulation loop in Figure 18.2. As blood circulates through the body, it travels first through one loop and then the other loop, over and over again. 	the pulmonary and systemic loops of the cardiovascular system are not connected	false
Pulmonary circulation is the shorter loop of the cardiovascular system. It carries blood between the heart and lungs. Oxygen-poor blood flows from the heart to the lungs. In the lungs, the blood absorbs oxygen and releases carbon dioxide. Then the oxygen-rich blood returns to the heart. 	in the pulmonary circulation oxygenpoor blood returns to the heart	false
Systemic circulation is the longer loop of the cardiovascular system. It carries blood between the heart and the rest of the body. Oxygen-rich blood flows from the heart to cells throughout the body. As it passes cells, the blood releases oxygen and absorbs carbon dioxide. Then the oxygen-poor blood returns to the heart. 	in the systemic circulation oxygenrich blood leaves the heart	true
Systemic circulation is the longer loop of the cardiovascular system. It carries blood between the heart and the rest of the body. Oxygen-rich blood flows from the heart to cells throughout the body. As it passes cells, the blood releases oxygen and absorbs carbon dioxide. Then the oxygen-poor blood returns to the heart. 	as blood flows by body cells it absorbs cellular waste products from them	true
Diseases of the heart and blood vessels are called cardiovascular diseases. The leading cause of cardiovascular disease is atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis is a condition in which a material called plaque builds up inside arteries. Plaque consists of cell debris, cholesterol, and other substances. As plaque builds up in an artery, the artery narrows, as shown in Figure If plaque blocks coronary arteries that supply blood to the heart, coronary heart disease results. Poor blood flow to the heart may cause chest pain or a heart attack. A heart attack occurs when the blood supply to part of the heart muscle is completely blocked so that cardiac muscle cells die. Coronary heart disease is the leading cause of death in U.S adults. 	disorder that occurs when plaque blocks coronary arteries	1.g
Blood flows through the heart in two paths. Trace these two paths in Figure 18.4 as you read about them below. You can also learn about how blood flows through the heart with this rap:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  1. One path of blood in the heart is through the right atrium and right ventricle. The right atrium receives oxygen- poor blood from the body. It pumps the blood into the right ventricle. Then the right ventricle pumps the blood out of the heart to the lungs. This path through the heart is part of the pulmonary circulation. 2. The other path of blood in the heart is through the left atrium and left ventricle. The left atrium receives oxygen-rich blood from the lungs. It pumps the blood into the left ventricle. Then the left ventricle pumps the blood out of the heart to the rest of the body. This path through the heart is part of the systemic circulation. 	chamber of the heart that receives oxygenpoor blood from the body	2.a
Blood flows through the heart in two paths. Trace these two paths in Figure 18.4 as you read about them below. You can also learn about how blood flows through the heart with this rap:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  1. One path of blood in the heart is through the right atrium and right ventricle. The right atrium receives oxygen- poor blood from the body. It pumps the blood into the right ventricle. Then the right ventricle pumps the blood out of the heart to the lungs. This path through the heart is part of the pulmonary circulation. 2. The other path of blood in the heart is through the left atrium and left ventricle. The left atrium receives oxygen-rich blood from the lungs. It pumps the blood into the left ventricle. Then the left ventricle pumps the blood out of the heart to the rest of the body. This path through the heart is part of the systemic circulation. 	chamber of the heart that pumps blood out of the heart to the rest of the body	3.c
Blood flows through the heart in two paths. Trace these two paths in Figure 18.4 as you read about them below. You can also learn about how blood flows through the heart with this rap:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  1. One path of blood in the heart is through the right atrium and right ventricle. The right atrium receives oxygen- poor blood from the body. It pumps the blood into the right ventricle. Then the right ventricle pumps the blood out of the heart to the lungs. This path through the heart is part of the pulmonary circulation. 2. The other path of blood in the heart is through the left atrium and left ventricle. The left atrium receives oxygen-rich blood from the lungs. It pumps the blood into the left ventricle. Then the left ventricle pumps the blood out of the heart to the rest of the body. This path through the heart is part of the systemic circulation. 	chamber of the heart that receives oxygenrich blood from the lungs	4.f
Diseases of the heart and blood vessels are called cardiovascular diseases. The leading cause of cardiovascular disease is atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis is a condition in which a material called plaque builds up inside arteries. Plaque consists of cell debris, cholesterol, and other substances. As plaque builds up in an artery, the artery narrows, as shown in Figure If plaque blocks coronary arteries that supply blood to the heart, coronary heart disease results. Poor blood flow to the heart may cause chest pain or a heart attack. A heart attack occurs when the blood supply to part of the heart muscle is completely blocked so that cardiac muscle cells die. Coronary heart disease is the leading cause of death in U.S adults. 	event in which blood supply to the heart is blocked so cardiac muscle cells die	5.d
Blood flows through the heart in two paths. Trace these two paths in Figure 18.4 as you read about them below. You can also learn about how blood flows through the heart with this rap:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  1. One path of blood in the heart is through the right atrium and right ventricle. The right atrium receives oxygen- poor blood from the body. It pumps the blood into the right ventricle. Then the right ventricle pumps the blood out of the heart to the lungs. This path through the heart is part of the pulmonary circulation. 2. The other path of blood in the heart is through the left atrium and left ventricle. The left atrium receives oxygen-rich blood from the lungs. It pumps the blood into the left ventricle. Then the left ventricle pumps the blood out of the heart to the rest of the body. This path through the heart is part of the systemic circulation. 	chamber of the heart that pumps blood out of the heart to the lungs	6.e
To move blood through the heart, cardiac muscles must contract in a certain sequence. First the atria must contract, followed quickly by the ventricles contracting. This series of contractions keeps blood moving continuously through the heart. Contractions of cardiac muscles arent under voluntary control. They are controlled by a cluster of special cells within the heart, commonly called the pacemaker. These cells send electrical signals to cardiac muscles so they contract in the correct sequence and with just the right timing. 	cluster of cells in the heart that control contractions of cardiac muscles	7.b
Blood flows through the heart in two paths. Trace these two paths in Figure 18.4 as you read about them below. You can also learn about how blood flows through the heart with this rap:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  1. One path of blood in the heart is through the right atrium and right ventricle. The right atrium receives oxygen- poor blood from the body. It pumps the blood into the right ventricle. Then the right ventricle pumps the blood out of the heart to the lungs. This path through the heart is part of the pulmonary circulation. 2. The other path of blood in the heart is through the left atrium and left ventricle. The left atrium receives oxygen-rich blood from the lungs. It pumps the blood into the left ventricle. Then the left ventricle pumps the blood out of the heart to the rest of the body. This path through the heart is part of the systemic circulation. 	blood in the pulmonary circulation passes through the right and left atria	true
To move blood through the heart, cardiac muscles must contract in a certain sequence. First the atria must contract, followed quickly by the ventricles contracting. This series of contractions keeps blood moving continuously through the heart. Contractions of cardiac muscles arent under voluntary control. They are controlled by a cluster of special cells within the heart, commonly called the pacemaker. These cells send electrical signals to cardiac muscles so they contract in the correct sequence and with just the right timing. 	each time the heart beats the ventricles contract first followed by the atria	false
There are three major types of blood vessels: arteries, veins, and capillaries. You can see each type in Figure 18.5. You can watch a good video introduction to the three types at this link:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Arteries are muscular blood vessels that carry blood away from the heart. They have thick walls that can withstand the pressure of blood pumped by the heart. Arteries generally carry oxygen-rich blood. The largest artery is the aorta, which receives blood directly from the heart. It branches to form smaller and smaller arteries throughout the body. The smallest arteries are called arterioles. Veins are blood vessels that carry blood toward the heart. This blood is no longer under pressure, so veins have thinner walls. To keep the blood moving, many veins have valves that prevent the backflow of blood. Veins generally carry oxygen-poor blood. The smallest veins are called venules. They merge to form larger and larger veins. The largest vein is the inferior vena cava, which carries blood from the lower body directly to the heart. Capillaries are the smallest type of blood vessels. They connect the smallest arteries (arterioles) and veins (venules). Exchange of substances between cells and the blood takes place across the walls of capillaries, which may be only one cell thick. 	veins must have muscular walls to withstand the pressure of blood pumped by the heart	false
There are three major types of blood vessels: arteries, veins, and capillaries. You can see each type in Figure 18.5. You can watch a good video introduction to the three types at this link:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Arteries are muscular blood vessels that carry blood away from the heart. They have thick walls that can withstand the pressure of blood pumped by the heart. Arteries generally carry oxygen-rich blood. The largest artery is the aorta, which receives blood directly from the heart. It branches to form smaller and smaller arteries throughout the body. The smallest arteries are called arterioles. Veins are blood vessels that carry blood toward the heart. This blood is no longer under pressure, so veins have thinner walls. To keep the blood moving, many veins have valves that prevent the backflow of blood. Veins generally carry oxygen-poor blood. The smallest veins are called venules. They merge to form larger and larger veins. The largest vein is the inferior vena cava, which carries blood from the lower body directly to the heart. Capillaries are the smallest type of blood vessels. They connect the smallest arteries (arterioles) and veins (venules). Exchange of substances between cells and the blood takes place across the walls of capillaries, which may be only one cell thick. 	arteries generally carry oxygenrich blood	true
Blood vessels are long, tube-like organs that consist mainly of muscle, connective, and epithelial tissues. They branch to form a complex network of vessels that run throughout the body. This network transports blood to all the bodys cells. 	when blood vessels dilate it increases the amount of blood they can carry	true
Blood flows through the heart in two paths. Trace these two paths in Figure 18.4 as you read about them below. You can also learn about how blood flows through the heart with this rap:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  1. One path of blood in the heart is through the right atrium and right ventricle. The right atrium receives oxygen- poor blood from the body. It pumps the blood into the right ventricle. Then the right ventricle pumps the blood out of the heart to the lungs. This path through the heart is part of the pulmonary circulation. 2. The other path of blood in the heart is through the left atrium and left ventricle. The left atrium receives oxygen-rich blood from the lungs. It pumps the blood into the left ventricle. Then the left ventricle pumps the blood out of the heart to the rest of the body. This path through the heart is part of the systemic circulation. 	blood flows through the heart in two paths	true
The heart has four chambers, or rooms, which you can see in Figure 18.3. Each chamber is an empty space with muscular walls through which blood can flow. The top two chambers of the heart are called the left and right atria (atrium, singular). The atria of the heart receive blood from the body or lungs and pump it into the bottom chambers of the heart. The bottom two chambers of the heart are called the left and right ventricles. The ventricles receive blood from the atria and pump it out of the heart, either to the lungs or to the rest of the body. Flaps of tissue called valves separate the hearts chambers. Valves keep blood flowing in just one direction through the heart. For example, a valve at the bottom of the right atrium opens to let blood flow from the right atrium to the right ventricle. Then the valve closes so the blood cant flow back into the right atrium. 	a valve prevents blood from flowing from a ventricle to an atrium	true
Blood flows through the heart in two paths. Trace these two paths in Figure 18.4 as you read about them below. You can also learn about how blood flows through the heart with this rap:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  1. One path of blood in the heart is through the right atrium and right ventricle. The right atrium receives oxygen- poor blood from the body. It pumps the blood into the right ventricle. Then the right ventricle pumps the blood out of the heart to the lungs. This path through the heart is part of the pulmonary circulation. 2. The other path of blood in the heart is through the left atrium and left ventricle. The left atrium receives oxygen-rich blood from the lungs. It pumps the blood into the left ventricle. Then the left ventricle pumps the blood out of the heart to the rest of the body. This path through the heart is part of the systemic circulation. 	the systemic circulation includes the right atrium and right ventricle	false
Blood vessels are long, tube-like organs that consist mainly of muscle, connective, and epithelial tissues. They branch to form a complex network of vessels that run throughout the body. This network transports blood to all the bodys cells. 	the aorta is a large blood vessel that carries blood to the heart	false
There are three major types of blood vessels: arteries, veins, and capillaries. You can see each type in Figure 18.5. You can watch a good video introduction to the three types at this link:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Arteries are muscular blood vessels that carry blood away from the heart. They have thick walls that can withstand the pressure of blood pumped by the heart. Arteries generally carry oxygen-rich blood. The largest artery is the aorta, which receives blood directly from the heart. It branches to form smaller and smaller arteries throughout the body. The smallest arteries are called arterioles. Veins are blood vessels that carry blood toward the heart. This blood is no longer under pressure, so veins have thinner walls. To keep the blood moving, many veins have valves that prevent the backflow of blood. Veins generally carry oxygen-poor blood. The smallest veins are called venules. They merge to form larger and larger veins. The largest vein is the inferior vena cava, which carries blood from the lower body directly to the heart. Capillaries are the smallest type of blood vessels. They connect the smallest arteries (arterioles) and veins (venules). Exchange of substances between cells and the blood takes place across the walls of capillaries, which may be only one cell thick. 	veins have thicker walls than arteries	false
Blood vessels help regulate body processes by either dilating (widening) or constricting (narrowing). This changes the amount of blood flowing to particular organs. For example, dilation of blood vessels in the skin allows more blood to flow to the surface of the body. This helps the body lose excess heat. Constriction of these blood vessels has the opposite effect and helps the body conserve heat. 	one way that blood vessels help maintain homeostasis is by dilating or constricting	true
Diseases of the cardiovascular system are common and may be life threatening. A healthy lifestyle can reduce the risk of such diseases developing. 	the leading cause of cardiovascular disease is atherosclerosis	true
Blood consists of both liquid and cells. The liquid part of blood is called plasma. Plasma is a watery, golden-yellow fluid that contains many dissolved substances. Substances dissolved in plasma include glucose, proteins, and gases. Plasma also contains blood cells. There are three types of blood cells: red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. You can see all three types in Figure 18.8. 1. Red blood cells are shaped like flattened disks. There are trillions of red blood cells in your blood. Each red blood cell has millions of molecules of hemoglobin. Hemoglobin is a protein that contains iron. The iron in hemoglobin gives red blood cells their red color. It also explains how hemoglobin carries oxygen. The iron in hemoglobin binds with oxygen molecules so they can be carried by red blood cells. 2. White blood cells are larger than red blood cells, but there are far fewer of them. Their role is to defend the body in various ways. For example, white blood cells called phagocytes engulf and destroy microorganisms and debris in the blood. 3. Platelets are small, sticky cell fragments that help blood clot. A blood clot is a solid mass of cell fragments and other substances that plugs a leak in a damaged blood vessel. Platelets stick to tears in blood vessels and to each other, helping to form a clot at the site of injury. Platelets also release chemicals that are needed for clotting to occur. 	plasma carries dissolved substances such as glucose and proteins	true
ABO blood type is determined by two common antigens, often called antigen A and antigen B. If your red blood cells carry only antigen A, you have blood type A. If your red blood cells carry only antigen B, you have blood type B. If your red blood cells carry both antigen A and antigen B, you have blood type AB. If your red blood cells carry neither antigen A nor antigen B, you have blood type O. 	there are more white blood cells than red blood cells in normal blood	false
ABO blood type is determined by two common antigens, often called antigen A and antigen B. If your red blood cells carry only antigen A, you have blood type A. If your red blood cells carry only antigen B, you have blood type B. If your red blood cells carry both antigen A and antigen B, you have blood type AB. If your red blood cells carry neither antigen A nor antigen B, you have blood type O. 	phagocytes are cells that help form blood clots	false
The main function of blood is transport. Blood in arteries carries oxygen and nutrients to all the bodys cells. Blood in veins carries carbon dioxide and other wastes away from cells to be excreted. Blood also transports the chemical messengers called hormones to cells throughout the body where they are needed to regulate body functions. Blood has several other functions as well. For example, blood: defends the body against infections. repairs body tissues. controls the bodys pH. helps regulate body temperature. 	the main function of blood is transport	true
ABO blood type is determined by two common antigens, often called antigen A and antigen B. If your red blood cells carry only antigen A, you have blood type A. If your red blood cells carry only antigen B, you have blood type B. If your red blood cells carry both antigen A and antigen B, you have blood type AB. If your red blood cells carry neither antigen A nor antigen B, you have blood type O. 	your abo blood type is controlled by genes you get from your parents	true
Anemia is a disease that occurs when there is not enough hemoglobin (or iron) in the blood so it cant carry adequate oxygen to the cells. There are many possible causes of anemia. One possible cause is excessive blood loss due to an injury or surgery. Not getting enough iron in the diet is another possible cause. 	one cause of anemia is lack of iron in the diet	true
Hemophilia is a genetic disorder in which blood fails to clot properly because a normal clotting factor in the blood is lacking. In people with hemophilia, even a minor injury can cause a life-threatening loss of blood. Most cases of hemophilia are caused by a recessive gene on the X chromosome. The disorder is expressed much more commonly in males because they have just one X chromosome. 	hemophilia is more common in females than in males	false
Some diseases affect mainly the blood or its components. They include anemia, leukemia, hemophilia, and sickle- cell disease. 	solid mass of cell fragments and other substances that plugs a leak in a blood vessel	1.d
Anemia is a disease that occurs when there is not enough hemoglobin (or iron) in the blood so it cant carry adequate oxygen to the cells. There are many possible causes of anemia. One possible cause is excessive blood loss due to an injury or surgery. Not getting enough iron in the diet is another possible cause. 	condition in which blood does not have enough hemoglobin or iron to carry adequate oxygen to	2.e
Leukemia is a type of cancer in which bone marrow produces abnormal white blood cells. The abnormal cells cant do their job of fighting infections. Like most cancers, leukemia is thought to be caused by a combination of genetic and environmental factors. It is the most common cancer in children. 	type of cancer in which bone marrow produces abnormal white blood cells	3.g
Anemia is a disease that occurs when there is not enough hemoglobin (or iron) in the blood so it cant carry adequate oxygen to the cells. There are many possible causes of anemia. One possible cause is excessive blood loss due to an injury or surgery. Not getting enough iron in the diet is another possible cause. 	genetic disorder in which abnormal hemoglobin causes red blood cells to change shape	4.c
Blood is a liquid connective tissue. It circulates throughout the body via blood vessels due to the pumping action of the heart. You couldnt survive without the approximately 4.5 to 5 liters of blood that are constantly being pumped through your blood vessels. 	the cardiovascular system normally contains about 25 liters of blood	false
ABO blood type is determined by two common antigens, often called antigen A and antigen B. If your red blood cells carry only antigen A, you have blood type A. If your red blood cells carry only antigen B, you have blood type B. If your red blood cells carry both antigen A and antigen B, you have blood type AB. If your red blood cells carry neither antigen A nor antigen B, you have blood type O. 	antigens on your red blood cells determine your blood type	true
Some diseases affect mainly the blood or its components. They include anemia, leukemia, hemophilia, and sickle- cell disease. 	small sticky cell fragment that helps blood clot	5.f
Some diseases affect mainly the blood or its components. They include anemia, leukemia, hemophilia, and sickle- cell disease. 	dissolved substances in blood include red and white blood cells	false
Some diseases affect mainly the blood or its components. They include anemia, leukemia, hemophilia, and sickle- cell disease. 	classification of an individuals blood based on its red blood cell antigens	6.a
Hemophilia is a genetic disorder in which blood fails to clot properly because a normal clotting factor in the blood is lacking. In people with hemophilia, even a minor injury can cause a life-threatening loss of blood. Most cases of hemophilia are caused by a recessive gene on the X chromosome. The disorder is expressed much more commonly in males because they have just one X chromosome. 	genetic disorder in which blood is lacking a normal clotting factor	7.b
Anemia is a disease that occurs when there is not enough hemoglobin (or iron) in the blood so it cant carry adequate oxygen to the cells. There are many possible causes of anemia. One possible cause is excessive blood loss due to an injury or surgery. Not getting enough iron in the diet is another possible cause. 	one cause of anemia is excessive loss of blood due to injury or surgery	true
The main function of blood is transport. Blood in arteries carries oxygen and nutrients to all the bodys cells. Blood in veins carries carbon dioxide and other wastes away from cells to be excreted. Blood also transports the chemical messengers called hormones to cells throughout the body where they are needed to regulate body functions. Blood has several other functions as well. For example, blood: defends the body against infections. repairs body tissues. controls the bodys pH. helps regulate body temperature. 	blood in veins carries oxygen and nutrients to all the cells of the body	false
Take in a big breath of air through your nose. As you breathe in, you may feel the air pass down through your throat and notice your chest expand. Now breathe out and observe the opposite events occurring. Breathing in and out may seem like simple actions, but they are just part of the complex process of respiration. Respiration actually occurs in four steps: 1. 2. 3. 4. breathing (inhaling and exhaling) gas exchange between the air and blood gas transport by the blood gas exchange between the blood and cells 	gas exchange occurs twice during the process of respiration	true
You can see the main structures of the respiratory system in Figure 19.1. They include the nose, trachea, lungs, and diaphragm. Use the figure to trace how air moves through the respiratory system when you read about it below. You can also use this interactive to explore the respiratory system and see how it functions: http://science.nationalgeogr 	air is inhaled when the diaphragm relaxes	false
Breathing is the process of moving air into and out of the lungs. The process depends on a muscle called the diaphragm. This is a large, sheet-like muscle below the lungs. You can see it in Figure 19.2. Inhaling, or breathing in, occurs when the diaphragm contracts. This increases the size of the chest, which decreases air pressure inside the lungs. The difference in air pressure between the lungs and outside air causes air to rush into the lungs. Exhaling, or breathing out, occurs when the diaphragm relaxes. This decreases the size of the chest, which increases air pressure inside the lungs. The difference in air pressure between the lungs and outside air causes air to rush out of the lungs. When you inhale, air enters the respiratory system through your nose and ends up in your lungs, where gas exchange with the blood takes place. What happens to the air along the way? In the nose, mucus and hairs trap any dust or other particles in the air. The air is also warmed and moistened so it wont harm delicate tissues of the lungs. Next, air passes through the pharynx, a passageway that is shared with the digestive system. From the pharynx, the air passes next through the larynx, or voice box. After the larynx, air moves into the trachea, or wind pipe. This is a long tube that leads down to the lungs in the chest. In the chest, the trachea divides as it enters the lungs to form the right and left bronchi (bronchus, singular). These passages are covered with mucus and tiny hairs called cilia. The mucus traps any remaining particles in the air. The cilia move and sweep the particles and mucus toward the throat so they can be expelled from the body. Air passes from the bronchi into smaller passages called bronchioles. The bronchioles end in clusters of tiny air sacs called alveoli (alveolus, singular). 	cilia in the bronchi sweep mucus and particles toward the alveoli	false
The alveoli in the lungs are where gas exchange between the air and blood takes place. Each alveolus is surrounded by a network of capillaries. When you inhale, air in the alveoli has a greater concentration of oxygen than does blood in the capillaries. The difference in oxygen concentration causes oxygen to diffuse from the air into the blood. You can see how this occurs in Figure 19.3. Unlike oxygen, carbon dioxide is more concentrated in the blood in the capillaries surrounding the alveoli than it is in the air inside the alveoli. Therefore, carbon dioxide diffuses in the opposite direction. It moves out of the blood and into the air. 	each alveolus is surrounded by a network of capillaries	true
You can see the main structures of the respiratory system in Figure 19.1. They include the nose, trachea, lungs, and diaphragm. Use the figure to trace how air moves through the respiratory system when you read about it below. You can also use this interactive to explore the respiratory system and see how it functions: http://science.nationalgeogr 	the lungs are the main organs of the respiratory system	true
You can see the main structures of the respiratory system in Figure 19.1. They include the nose, trachea, lungs, and diaphragm. Use the figure to trace how air moves through the respiratory system when you read about it below. You can also use this interactive to explore the respiratory system and see how it functions: http://science.nationalgeogr 	when the diaphragm contracts air flows out of the lungs	false
The alveoli in the lungs are where gas exchange between the air and blood takes place. Each alveolus is surrounded by a network of capillaries. When you inhale, air in the alveoli has a greater concentration of oxygen than does blood in the capillaries. The difference in oxygen concentration causes oxygen to diffuse from the air into the blood. You can see how this occurs in Figure 19.3. Unlike oxygen, carbon dioxide is more concentrated in the blood in the capillaries surrounding the alveoli than it is in the air inside the alveoli. Therefore, carbon dioxide diffuses in the opposite direction. It moves out of the blood and into the air. 	when you inhale oxygen is more concentrated in the blood than in the air inside alveoli	false
Common diseases of the respiratory system include asthma, pneumonia, and emphysema. All of them are diseases of the lungs. You can see some of the changes in the lungs that occur in each of these diseases in Figure 19.4. Asthma is a disease in which bronchioles in the lungs periodically swell and fill with mucus. Symptoms of asthma may include difficulty breathing, wheezing, coughing, and chest tightness. An asthma attack may be triggered by allergies, strenuous exercise, stress, or another respiratory illness such as a cold. Pneumonia is a disease in which some of the alveoli of the lungs fill with fluid so they can no longer exchange gas. Symptoms of pneumonia typically include coughing, chest pain, difficulty breathing, and fatigue. Pneumonia may be caused by an infection or an injury to the lungs. Emphysema is a disease in which the walls of the alveoli break down so less gas can be exchanged by the lungs. The main symptom of emphysema is shortness of breath. The damage to the alveoli is usually caused by smoking and is permanent. 	pneumonia may be caused by an infection or an injury to the lungs	true
The cells of the body have a lower concentration of oxygen that does blood in the capillaries that supply body cells. Therefore, oxygen diffuses from the blood into the cells. Carbon dioxide, which cells produce in cellular respiration, is more concentrated in the cells. Therefore, carbon dioxide diffuses out of the cells and into the blood. The carbon dioxide travels in capillaries to veins and then to the heart. The heart pumps the blood to the lungs, where the carbon dioxide diffuses into the alveoli. It passes out of the body during exhalation. This brings the process of respiration full circle. 	when you exhale carbon dioxide diffuses out of the blood into the air in the alveoli	true
Common diseases of the respiratory system include asthma, pneumonia, and emphysema. All of them are diseases of the lungs. You can see some of the changes in the lungs that occur in each of these diseases in Figure 19.4. Asthma is a disease in which bronchioles in the lungs periodically swell and fill with mucus. Symptoms of asthma may include difficulty breathing, wheezing, coughing, and chest tightness. An asthma attack may be triggered by allergies, strenuous exercise, stress, or another respiratory illness such as a cold. Pneumonia is a disease in which some of the alveoli of the lungs fill with fluid so they can no longer exchange gas. Symptoms of pneumonia typically include coughing, chest pain, difficulty breathing, and fatigue. Pneumonia may be caused by an infection or an injury to the lungs. Emphysema is a disease in which the walls of the alveoli break down so less gas can be exchanged by the lungs. The main symptom of emphysema is shortness of breath. The damage to the alveoli is usually caused by smoking and is permanent. 	in some people asthma attacks may be triggered by strenuous exercise	true
No doubt youve had the common cold. When you did, you probably had respiratory system symptoms. For example, you may have had a stuffy nose that made it hard to breathe. While you may feel miserable when you have a cold, it is generally a relatively mild disease. Many other respiratory system diseases are more serious. 	particles in air are trapped by hairs in the nose and cilia in the bronchi	true
Common diseases of the respiratory system include asthma, pneumonia, and emphysema. All of them are diseases of the lungs. You can see some of the changes in the lungs that occur in each of these diseases in Figure 19.4. Asthma is a disease in which bronchioles in the lungs periodically swell and fill with mucus. Symptoms of asthma may include difficulty breathing, wheezing, coughing, and chest tightness. An asthma attack may be triggered by allergies, strenuous exercise, stress, or another respiratory illness such as a cold. Pneumonia is a disease in which some of the alveoli of the lungs fill with fluid so they can no longer exchange gas. Symptoms of pneumonia typically include coughing, chest pain, difficulty breathing, and fatigue. Pneumonia may be caused by an infection or an injury to the lungs. Emphysema is a disease in which the walls of the alveoli break down so less gas can be exchanged by the lungs. The main symptom of emphysema is shortness of breath. The damage to the alveoli is usually caused by smoking and is permanent. 	during an asthma attack the bronchioles widen and produce less mucus	false
The alveoli in the lungs are where gas exchange between the air and blood takes place. Each alveolus is surrounded by a network of capillaries. When you inhale, air in the alveoli has a greater concentration of oxygen than does blood in the capillaries. The difference in oxygen concentration causes oxygen to diffuse from the air into the blood. You can see how this occurs in Figure 19.3. Unlike oxygen, carbon dioxide is more concentrated in the blood in the capillaries surrounding the alveoli than it is in the air inside the alveoli. Therefore, carbon dioxide diffuses in the opposite direction. It moves out of the blood and into the air. 	tiny air sac in the lungs where gas exchange takes place	1.d
You can see the main structures of the respiratory system in Figure 19.1. They include the nose, trachea, lungs, and diaphragm. Use the figure to trace how air moves through the respiratory system when you read about it below. You can also use this interactive to explore the respiratory system and see how it functions: http://science.nationalgeogr 	large sheetlike muscle below the lungs needed for normal breathing	2.f
Breathing is the process of moving air into and out of the lungs. The process depends on a muscle called the diaphragm. This is a large, sheet-like muscle below the lungs. You can see it in Figure 19.2. Inhaling, or breathing in, occurs when the diaphragm contracts. This increases the size of the chest, which decreases air pressure inside the lungs. The difference in air pressure between the lungs and outside air causes air to rush into the lungs. Exhaling, or breathing out, occurs when the diaphragm relaxes. This decreases the size of the chest, which increases air pressure inside the lungs. The difference in air pressure between the lungs and outside air causes air to rush out of the lungs. When you inhale, air enters the respiratory system through your nose and ends up in your lungs, where gas exchange with the blood takes place. What happens to the air along the way? In the nose, mucus and hairs trap any dust or other particles in the air. The air is also warmed and moistened so it wont harm delicate tissues of the lungs. Next, air passes through the pharynx, a passageway that is shared with the digestive system. From the pharynx, the air passes next through the larynx, or voice box. After the larynx, air moves into the trachea, or wind pipe. This is a long tube that leads down to the lungs in the chest. In the chest, the trachea divides as it enters the lungs to form the right and left bronchi (bronchus, singular). These passages are covered with mucus and tiny hairs called cilia. The mucus traps any remaining particles in the air. The cilia move and sweep the particles and mucus toward the throat so they can be expelled from the body. Air passes from the bronchi into smaller passages called bronchioles. The bronchioles end in clusters of tiny air sacs called alveoli (alveolus, singular). 	voice box	3.a
The cells of the body have a lower concentration of oxygen that does blood in the capillaries that supply body cells. Therefore, oxygen diffuses from the blood into the cells. Carbon dioxide, which cells produce in cellular respiration, is more concentrated in the cells. Therefore, carbon dioxide diffuses out of the cells and into the blood. The carbon dioxide travels in capillaries to veins and then to the heart. The heart pumps the blood to the lungs, where the carbon dioxide diffuses into the alveoli. It passes out of the body during exhalation. This brings the process of respiration full circle. 	process of moving air into and out of the lungs	4.g
The bodys exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide with the air is called respiration. Respiration actually consists of two stages. In one stage, air is taken into the body and carbon dioxide is released to the outside air. In the other stage, oxygen is delivered to all the cells of the body and carbon dioxide is carried away from the cells. Another kind of respiration takes place within body cells. This kind of respiration is called cellular respiration. Its the process in which cells obtain energy by burning glucose. Both types of respiration are connected. Cellular respiration uses oxygen and produces carbon dioxide. Respiration by the respiratory system supplies the oxygen needed for cellular respiration. It also removes the carbon dioxide produced by cellular respiration. 	process in which cells obtain energy by burning glucose	5. b
After the blood in the capillaries in the lungs picks up oxygen, it leaves the lungs and travels to the heart. The heart pumps the oxygen-rich blood into arteries, which carry it throughout the body. The blood passes eventually into capillaries that supply body cells. 	one of two passages that carry air between the trachea and bronchioles	6. c
Breathing is the process of moving air into and out of the lungs. The process depends on a muscle called the diaphragm. This is a large, sheet-like muscle below the lungs. You can see it in Figure 19.2. Inhaling, or breathing in, occurs when the diaphragm contracts. This increases the size of the chest, which decreases air pressure inside the lungs. The difference in air pressure between the lungs and outside air causes air to rush into the lungs. Exhaling, or breathing out, occurs when the diaphragm relaxes. This decreases the size of the chest, which increases air pressure inside the lungs. The difference in air pressure between the lungs and outside air causes air to rush out of the lungs. When you inhale, air enters the respiratory system through your nose and ends up in your lungs, where gas exchange with the blood takes place. What happens to the air along the way? In the nose, mucus and hairs trap any dust or other particles in the air. The air is also warmed and moistened so it wont harm delicate tissues of the lungs. Next, air passes through the pharynx, a passageway that is shared with the digestive system. From the pharynx, the air passes next through the larynx, or voice box. After the larynx, air moves into the trachea, or wind pipe. This is a long tube that leads down to the lungs in the chest. In the chest, the trachea divides as it enters the lungs to form the right and left bronchi (bronchus, singular). These passages are covered with mucus and tiny hairs called cilia. The mucus traps any remaining particles in the air. The cilia move and sweep the particles and mucus toward the throat so they can be expelled from the body. Air passes from the bronchi into smaller passages called bronchioles. The bronchioles end in clusters of tiny air sacs called alveoli (alveolus, singular). 	wind pipe	7. e
Excretion is any process in which excess water or wastes are removed from the body. Excretion is the job of the excretory system. Besides the kidneys, other organs of excretion include the large intestine, liver, skin and lungs. The large intestine eliminates food wastes that remain after digestion takes place. The liver removes excess amino acids and toxins from the blood. Sweat glands in the skin excrete excess water and salts in sweat. The lungs exhale carbon dioxide and also excess water as water vapor. Each of the above organs of excretion is also part of another body system. For example, the large intestine and liver are part of the digestive system, and the lungs are part of the respiratory system. The kidneys are the main organs of excretion. They are part of the urinary system. 	organs of excretion include the large intestine and sweat glands in the skin	true
Blood with wastes enters each kidney through an artery, which branches into many capillaries. After passing through capillaries and being filtered, the clean blood leaves the kidney through a vein. The part of each nephron called the glomerulus is where blood in the capillaries is filtered. Excess water and wastes are filtered out of the blood. The tubule of the nephron collects these substances. Some of the water is reabsorbed. The remaining fluid is urine. 	blood containing wastes enters each kidney through a ureter	false
The kidneys are a pair of bean-shaped organs at each side of the body just above the waist. You can see a diagram of a kidney in Figure 19.7. The function of the kidneys is to filter blood and form urine. Tiny structures in the kidneys, called nephrons, perform this function. Each kidney contains more than a million nephrons. 	all of the water filtered out of the blood in the kidneys is excreted in urine	false
From the kidneys, urine enters the ureters. These are two muscular tubes that carry urine to the urinary bladder. Contractions of the muscles of the ureters move the urine along by peristalsis. The urinary bladder is a sac-like organ that stores urine. When the bladder is about half full, a sphincter relaxes to let urine flow out of the bladder and into the urethra. The urethra is a muscular tube that carries urine out of the body through another sphincter. The process of urine leaving the body is called urination. The second sphincter and the process of urination are normally under conscious control. 	the process of urination is normally under conscious control	true
The kidneys are a pair of bean-shaped organs at each side of the body just above the waist. You can see a diagram of a kidney in Figure 19.7. The function of the kidneys is to filter blood and form urine. Tiny structures in the kidneys, called nephrons, perform this function. Each kidney contains more than a million nephrons. 	the kidneys filter all of the blood in the body once a day	false
The kidneys help the body maintain homeostasis in several ways. They filter all the blood in the body many times each day and produce urine. They control the amount of water and dissolved substances in the blood by excreting more or less of them in urine. The kidneys also secrete hormones that help maintain homeostasis. For example, they produce a hormone that stimulates bone marrow to produce red blood cells when more are needed. They also secrete a hormone that regulates blood pressure and keeps it in a normal range. 	one function of the kidneys is to help keep blood pressure within a normal range	true
The kidneys help the body maintain homeostasis in several ways. They filter all the blood in the body many times each day and produce urine. They control the amount of water and dissolved substances in the blood by excreting more or less of them in urine. The kidneys also secrete hormones that help maintain homeostasis. For example, they produce a hormone that stimulates bone marrow to produce red blood cells when more are needed. They also secrete a hormone that regulates blood pressure and keeps it in a normal range. 	you need both kidneys to live a normal healthy life	false
Excretion is any process in which excess water or wastes are removed from the body. Excretion is the job of the excretory system. Besides the kidneys, other organs of excretion include the large intestine, liver, skin and lungs. The large intestine eliminates food wastes that remain after digestion takes place. The liver removes excess amino acids and toxins from the blood. Sweat glands in the skin excrete excess water and salts in sweat. The lungs exhale carbon dioxide and also excess water as water vapor. Each of the above organs of excretion is also part of another body system. For example, the large intestine and liver are part of the digestive system, and the lungs are part of the respiratory system. The kidneys are the main organs of excretion. They are part of the urinary system. 	the liver removes excess water and salts from the blood	false
The kidneys are a pair of bean-shaped organs at each side of the body just above the waist. You can see a diagram of a kidney in Figure 19.7. The function of the kidneys is to filter blood and form urine. Tiny structures in the kidneys, called nephrons, perform this function. Each kidney contains more than a million nephrons. 	each kidney contains more than a million nephrons	true
Blood with wastes enters each kidney through an artery, which branches into many capillaries. After passing through capillaries and being filtered, the clean blood leaves the kidney through a vein. The part of each nephron called the glomerulus is where blood in the capillaries is filtered. Excess water and wastes are filtered out of the blood. The tubule of the nephron collects these substances. Some of the water is reabsorbed. The remaining fluid is urine. 	some of the water filtered out of the blood by nephrons is reabsorbed	true
From the kidneys, urine enters the ureters. These are two muscular tubes that carry urine to the urinary bladder. Contractions of the muscles of the ureters move the urine along by peristalsis. The urinary bladder is a sac-like organ that stores urine. When the bladder is about half full, a sphincter relaxes to let urine flow out of the bladder and into the urethra. The urethra is a muscular tube that carries urine out of the body through another sphincter. The process of urine leaving the body is called urination. The second sphincter and the process of urination are normally under conscious control. 	the bladder is the urinary system organ where urine forms	false
The kidneys are a pair of bean-shaped organs at each side of the body just above the waist. You can see a diagram of a kidney in Figure 19.7. The function of the kidneys is to filter blood and form urine. Tiny structures in the kidneys, called nephrons, perform this function. Each kidney contains more than a million nephrons. 	the only cure for kidney failure is a kidney transplant	true
From the kidneys, urine enters the ureters. These are two muscular tubes that carry urine to the urinary bladder. Contractions of the muscles of the ureters move the urine along by peristalsis. The urinary bladder is a sac-like organ that stores urine. When the bladder is about half full, a sphincter relaxes to let urine flow out of the bladder and into the urethra. The urethra is a muscular tube that carries urine out of the body through another sphincter. The process of urine leaving the body is called urination. The second sphincter and the process of urination are normally under conscious control. 	muscular tube that carries urine out of the body	1.d
The kidneys are a pair of bean-shaped organs at each side of the body just above the waist. You can see a diagram of a kidney in Figure 19.7. The function of the kidneys is to filter blood and form urine. Tiny structures in the kidneys, called nephrons, perform this function. Each kidney contains more than a million nephrons. 	tiny structure in a kidney that filters blood and forms urine	2.c
From the kidneys, urine enters the ureters. These are two muscular tubes that carry urine to the urinary bladder. Contractions of the muscles of the ureters move the urine along by peristalsis. The urinary bladder is a sac-like organ that stores urine. When the bladder is about half full, a sphincter relaxes to let urine flow out of the bladder and into the urethra. The urethra is a muscular tube that carries urine out of the body through another sphincter. The process of urine leaving the body is called urination. The second sphincter and the process of urination are normally under conscious control. 	saclike organ that stores urine	3.g
The kidneys are a pair of bean-shaped organs at each side of the body just above the waist. You can see a diagram of a kidney in Figure 19.7. The function of the kidneys is to filter blood and form urine. Tiny structures in the kidneys, called nephrons, perform this function. Each kidney contains more than a million nephrons. 	mineral crystal that forms in urine inside a kidney	4.b
The kidneys are a pair of bean-shaped organs at each side of the body just above the waist. You can see a diagram of a kidney in Figure 19.7. The function of the kidneys is to filter blood and form urine. Tiny structures in the kidneys, called nephrons, perform this function. Each kidney contains more than a million nephrons. 	artificial filtering of blood through a machine	5.f
From the kidneys, urine enters the ureters. These are two muscular tubes that carry urine to the urinary bladder. Contractions of the muscles of the ureters move the urine along by peristalsis. The urinary bladder is a sac-like organ that stores urine. When the bladder is about half full, a sphincter relaxes to let urine flow out of the bladder and into the urethra. The urethra is a muscular tube that carries urine out of the body through another sphincter. The process of urine leaving the body is called urination. The second sphincter and the process of urination are normally under conscious control. 	muscular tube that carries urine from a kidney to the urinary bladder	6.a
From the kidneys, urine enters the ureters. These are two muscular tubes that carry urine to the urinary bladder. Contractions of the muscles of the ureters move the urine along by peristalsis. The urinary bladder is a sac-like organ that stores urine. When the bladder is about half full, a sphincter relaxes to let urine flow out of the bladder and into the urethra. The urethra is a muscular tube that carries urine out of the body through another sphincter. The process of urine leaving the body is called urination. The second sphincter and the process of urination are normally under conscious control. 	main organ of the urinary system	7.e
The smallest particle of an element that still has the properties of that element is an atom. Atoms are extremely tiny. They can be observed only with an electron microscope. They are commonly represented by models, like the one Figure 2.6. An atom has a central nucleus that is positive in charge. The nucleus is surrounded by negatively charged particles called electrons. The smallest particle of a compound that still has the properties of that compound is a molecule. A molecule consists of two or more atoms. For example, a molecule of water consists of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen. Thats why the chemical formula for water is H2 O. You can see a simple model of a water molecule in Figure 2.7. 	smallest particle of an element that still has the properties of that element	1.e
Carbohydrates are biochemical compounds that include sugar, starch, glycogen, and cellulose. Sugars are simple carbohydrates with relatively small molecules. Glucose is the smallest of all the sugar molecules with its chemical formula of C6 H12 O6 . This means that a molecule of glucose contains 6 atoms of carbon, 12 atoms of hydrogen, and 6 atoms of oxygen. Plants and some other organisms make glucose in the process of photosynthesis. Living things that cannot make glucose can obtain it by consuming plants or organisms that consume plants. Starches are complex carbohydrates. They are polymers of glucose. Starches contain hundreds of glucose monomers. Plants make starches to store extra glucose. Consumers can get starches by eating plants. Common sources of starches in the human diet are pictured in the Figure 2.8. Our digestive system breaks down starches to sugar, which our cells use for energy. Like other animals, we store any extra glucose as the complex carbohydrate called glycogen. Glycogen is also a polymer of glucose. Cellulose is another complex carbohydrate found in plants that is a polymer of glucose. Cellulose molecules bundle together to form long, tough fibers. Cellulose is the most abundant biochemical compound. It makes up the cell walls of plants and gives support to stems and tree trunks. 	carbohydrate that makes up the cell walls of plants	2.d
Besides water, most of the compounds in living things are biochemical compounds. A biochemical compound is a carbon-based compound that is found in living organisms. Carbon is an element that has a tremendous ability to form large compounds. Each atom of carbon can form four chemical bonds with other atoms. A chemical bond is the sharing of electrons between atoms. Bonds hold the atoms together in chemical compounds. A carbon atom can form bonds with other carbon atoms or with atoms of other elements. 	biochemical compound that consists of nucleotides	3.g
The smallest particle of an element that still has the properties of that element is an atom. Atoms are extremely tiny. They can be observed only with an electron microscope. They are commonly represented by models, like the one Figure 2.6. An atom has a central nucleus that is positive in charge. The nucleus is surrounded by negatively charged particles called electrons. The smallest particle of a compound that still has the properties of that compound is a molecule. A molecule consists of two or more atoms. For example, a molecule of water consists of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen. Thats why the chemical formula for water is H2 O. You can see a simple model of a water molecule in Figure 2.7. 	smallest particle of a compound that still has the properties of that compound	4.c
Besides water, most of the compounds in living things are biochemical compounds. A biochemical compound is a carbon-based compound that is found in living organisms. Carbon is an element that has a tremendous ability to form large compounds. Each atom of carbon can form four chemical bonds with other atoms. A chemical bond is the sharing of electrons between atoms. Bonds hold the atoms together in chemical compounds. A carbon atom can form bonds with other carbon atoms or with atoms of other elements. 	class of biochemical compound that consists of amino acids	5.b
Besides water, most of the compounds in living things are biochemical compounds. A biochemical compound is a carbon-based compound that is found in living organisms. Carbon is an element that has a tremendous ability to form large compounds. Each atom of carbon can form four chemical bonds with other atoms. A chemical bond is the sharing of electrons between atoms. Bonds hold the atoms together in chemical compounds. A carbon atom can form bonds with other carbon atoms or with atoms of other elements. 	class of biochemical compound that consists of fatty acids	6.f
Proteins are biochemical compounds that consist of one or more chains of small molecules called amino acids. Amino acids are the monomers of proteins. There are only about 20 different amino acids. The sequence of amino acids in chains and the number of chains in a protein determine the proteins shape. Shapes may be very complex. You can learn more about the shapes of proteins at this link: MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  The shape of a protein determines its function. Proteins have many different functions. For example, proteins: make up muscle tissues. speed up chemical reactions in cells. regulate life processes. help defend against infections. 2.2. Chemistry of Living Things transport materials around the body in the blood. blood How hemoglobin transports oxygen in the 	protein that speeds up biochemical reactions	7.a
The smallest particle of an element that still has the properties of that element is an atom. Atoms are extremely tiny. They can be observed only with an electron microscope. They are commonly represented by models, like the one Figure 2.6. An atom has a central nucleus that is positive in charge. The nucleus is surrounded by negatively charged particles called electrons. The smallest particle of a compound that still has the properties of that compound is a molecule. A molecule consists of two or more atoms. For example, a molecule of water consists of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen. Thats why the chemical formula for water is H2 O. You can see a simple model of a water molecule in Figure 2.7. 	atoms can be observed only with an electron microscope	true
Carbohydrates are biochemical compounds that include sugar, starch, glycogen, and cellulose. Sugars are simple carbohydrates with relatively small molecules. Glucose is the smallest of all the sugar molecules with its chemical formula of C6 H12 O6 . This means that a molecule of glucose contains 6 atoms of carbon, 12 atoms of hydrogen, and 6 atoms of oxygen. Plants and some other organisms make glucose in the process of photosynthesis. Living things that cannot make glucose can obtain it by consuming plants or organisms that consume plants. Starches are complex carbohydrates. They are polymers of glucose. Starches contain hundreds of glucose monomers. Plants make starches to store extra glucose. Consumers can get starches by eating plants. Common sources of starches in the human diet are pictured in the Figure 2.8. Our digestive system breaks down starches to sugar, which our cells use for energy. Like other animals, we store any extra glucose as the complex carbohydrate called glycogen. Glycogen is also a polymer of glucose. Cellulose is another complex carbohydrate found in plants that is a polymer of glucose. Cellulose molecules bundle together to form long, tough fibers. Cellulose is the most abundant biochemical compound. It makes up the cell walls of plants and gives support to stems and tree trunks. 	glycogen is a complex carbohydrate found in animals	true
Carbohydrates are biochemical compounds that include sugar, starch, glycogen, and cellulose. Sugars are simple carbohydrates with relatively small molecules. Glucose is the smallest of all the sugar molecules with its chemical formula of C6 H12 O6 . This means that a molecule of glucose contains 6 atoms of carbon, 12 atoms of hydrogen, and 6 atoms of oxygen. Plants and some other organisms make glucose in the process of photosynthesis. Living things that cannot make glucose can obtain it by consuming plants or organisms that consume plants. Starches are complex carbohydrates. They are polymers of glucose. Starches contain hundreds of glucose monomers. Plants make starches to store extra glucose. Consumers can get starches by eating plants. Common sources of starches in the human diet are pictured in the Figure 2.8. Our digestive system breaks down starches to sugar, which our cells use for energy. Like other animals, we store any extra glucose as the complex carbohydrate called glycogen. Glycogen is also a polymer of glucose. Cellulose is another complex carbohydrate found in plants that is a polymer of glucose. Cellulose molecules bundle together to form long, tough fibers. Cellulose is the most abundant biochemical compound. It makes up the cell walls of plants and gives support to stems and tree trunks. 	glucose is a polymer of starch	false
Lipids are biochemical compounds that living things use to store energy and make cell membranes. Types of lipids include fats, oils, and phospholipids. Fats are solid lipids that animals use to store energy. Examples of fats include butter and the fat in meat. Oils are liquid lipids that plants use to store energy. Examples of oils include olive oil and corn oil. Phospholipids contain the element phosphorus. They make up the cell membranes of living things. Lipids are made of long chains consisting almost solely of carbon and hydrogen. These long chains are called fatty acids. Fatty acids may be saturated or unsaturated. The Figure 2.10 shows an example of each type of fatty acid. 	saturated fatty acids are found in oils	false
Each of the trillions of cells in your body is continuously performing thousands of anabolic and catabolic reactions. Thats an amazing number of biochemical reactionsfar more than the number of chemical reactions that might take place in a science lab or chemical plant. So many biochemical reactions can take place simultaneously in our cells because biochemical reactions occur very quickly. Thats because of enzymes. Enzymes are proteins that increase the rate of biochemical reactions. Enzymes arent changed or used up in the reactions, so they can be used to speed up the same reaction over and over again. Enzymes are highly specific for certain chemical reactions, so they are very effective. A reaction that would take years to occur without its enzyme might occur in a split second with the enzyme. 	the genetic code tells cells how to make proteins	true
All known matter can be divided into a little more than 100 different substances called elements. 	the substances that start a chemical reaction are called products	false
Some of the most important biochemical reactions are the reactions involved in photosynthesis and cellular respira- tion. Photosynthesis is the process in which producers capture light energy from the sun and use it to make glucose. This involves anabolic reactions. Cellular respiration is the process in which energy is released from glucose and stored in smaller amounts in other molecules that cells can use for energy. This involves catabolic reactions. Photosynthesis and cellular respiration together provide energy to almost all living cells. Figure 2.14 shows how photosynthesis and cellular respiration are related. You can read more about both processes in the chapter Cell Functions. 	cellular respiration involves catabolic reactions	true
A stroke occurs when a blood clot blocks blood flow to part of the brain. Brain cells die quickly when their oxygen supply is cut off. Therefore, a stroke may cause permanent loss of normal mental functions. Many stroke patients suffer some degree of paralysis, or loss of the ability to feel or move certain parts of the body. If medical treatment is given very soon after a stroke occurs, some of the damage may be reversed. Strokes occur mainly in older adults. 	a stroke occurs when a blood clot blocks blood flow to part of the brain	true
A drug is any chemical substance that affects the body or brain. Some drugs are medicines. Although these drugs are helpful when used properly, they can be misused like any other drug. Drugs that arent medicines include both legal and illegal drugs. Both can do harm. 	psychoactive drugs include antidepressants and caffeine	true
The cerebrum is divided down the middle from the front to the back of the head. The two halves of the cerebrum are called the right and left hemispheres. The two hemispheres are very similar but not identical. They are connected to each other by a thick bundle of axons deep within the brain. These axons allow the two hemispheres to communicate with each other. Did you know that the right hemisphere of the cerebrum controls the left side of the body, and vice versa? This can happen because of the connections between the two hemispheres. Each hemisphere is further divided into four parts, called lobes, as you can see in Figure 20.6. Each lobe has different functions. One function of each lobe is listed in the figure. 	the cerebellum is divided down the middle to form right and left hemispheres	false
The nervous system has two main parts, called the central nervous system and the peripheral nervous system. The peripheral nervous system is described later in this lesson. The central nervous system is shown in Figure 20.4. It includes the brain and spinal cord. 	the spinal cord is part of the peripheral nervous system	false
The sensory division of the peripheral nervous system carries messages from sense organs and internal organs to the central nervous system. For example, it carries messages about images from the eyes to the brain. Once the messages reach the brain, the brain interprets the information. 	the sensory division of the peripheral nervous system carries messages away from the brain	false
The structure of a neuron suits it for its function of transmitting nerve impulses. You can see what a neuron looks like in Figure 20.2. It has a special shape that lets it pass electrical signals to and from other cells. A neuron has three main parts: cell body, dendrites, and axon. 1. The cell body contains the nucleus and other organelles. 2. Dendrites receive nerve impulses from other cells. A single neuron may have thousands of dendrites. 3. The axon passes on the nerve impulses to other cells. It branches at the end into multiple nerve endings so it can transmit impulses to many other cells. 	a single neuron may have thousands of dendrites	true
The brain consists of three major parts, called the cerebrum, cerebellum, and brain stem. You can see these three parts of the brain in Figure 20.5. You can use this interactive animation to explore these parts of the brain: http://s 1. The cerebrum is the largest part of the brain. It controls conscious functions, such as thinking, sensing, speaking, and voluntary muscle movements. Whether you are chatting with a friend or playing a video game, you are using your cerebrum. 2. The cerebellum is the next largest part of the brain. It controls body position, coordination, and balance. Hakeems cerebellum kicked in when he started to lose his balance on the railing in the opening photo. It allowed him to regain his balance. 3. The brain stem (also called the medulla) is the smallest part of the brain. It controls involuntary body functions such as breathing, heartbeat, and digestion. It also carries nerve impulses back and forth between the rest of the brain and the spinal cord. 	the cerebellum controls conscious functions such as thinking and speaking	false
The cerebrum is divided down the middle from the front to the back of the head. The two halves of the cerebrum are called the right and left hemispheres. The two hemispheres are very similar but not identical. They are connected to each other by a thick bundle of axons deep within the brain. These axons allow the two hemispheres to communicate with each other. Did you know that the right hemisphere of the cerebrum controls the left side of the body, and vice versa? This can happen because of the connections between the two hemispheres. Each hemisphere is further divided into four parts, called lobes, as you can see in Figure 20.6. Each lobe has different functions. One function of each lobe is listed in the figure. 	the two hemispheres of the cerebrum are identical to each other	false
The nervous system has two main parts, called the central nervous system and the peripheral nervous system. The peripheral nervous system is described later in this lesson. The central nervous system is shown in Figure 20.4. It includes the brain and spinal cord. 	the peripheral nervous system includes all of the nervous tissue in the body except for the brain	false
The motor division of the peripheral nervous system carries messages from the central nervous system to muscles, internal organs, and glands throughout the body. The brain sends commands to these tissues, telling them how to respond. As you can see in Figure 20.7, the motor division is divided into additional parts. The autonomic part of the motor division controls involuntary responses. It sends messages to organs and glands. These messages control the body both during emergencies (sympathetic division) and during none- mergencies (parasympathetic division). The somatic part of the motor division controls voluntary responses. It sends messages to the skeletal muscles for movements that are under conscious control. 	the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system prepares the body for emergencies	true
Epilepsy is a disease in which seizures occur. A seizure is a period of lost consciousness that may include violent muscle contractions. It is caused by abnormal electrical activity in the brain. Epilepsy may result from an infection, injury, or tumor. In many cases, however, the cause cant be identified. There is no known cure for epilepsy, but the seizures often can be prevented with medicine. Sometimes children with epilepsy outgrow it by adulthood. 	seizures in epilepsy are caused by abnormal electrical activity in the brain	true
A drug is any chemical substance that affects the body or brain. Some drugs are medicines. Although these drugs are helpful when used properly, they can be misused like any other drug. Drugs that arent medicines include both legal and illegal drugs. Both can do harm. 	all psychoactive drugs are illegal drugs	false
There are three basic types of neurons: sensory neurons, motor neurons, and interneurons. All three types must work together to receive and respond to information. 1. Sensory neurons transmit nerve impulses from sense organs and internal organs to the brain via the spinal cord. In other words, they carry information about the inside and outside environment to the brain. 2. Motor neurons transmit nerve impulses from the brain via the spinal cord to internal organs, glands, and muscles. In other words, they carry information from the brain to the body, telling the body how to respond. 3. Interneurons carry nerve impulses back and forth between sensory and motor neurons. 	type of nerve cell that carries nerve impulses back and forth between sensory and motor neurons	1.g
The nervous system has two main parts, called the central nervous system and the peripheral nervous system. The peripheral nervous system is described later in this lesson. The central nervous system is shown in Figure 20.4. It includes the brain and spinal cord. 	largest part of the brain	2.f
The structure of a neuron suits it for its function of transmitting nerve impulses. You can see what a neuron looks like in Figure 20.2. It has a special shape that lets it pass electrical signals to and from other cells. A neuron has three main parts: cell body, dendrites, and axon. 1. The cell body contains the nucleus and other organelles. 2. Dendrites receive nerve impulses from other cells. A single neuron may have thousands of dendrites. 3. The axon passes on the nerve impulses to other cells. It branches at the end into multiple nerve endings so it can transmit impulses to many other cells. 	part of a neuron that contains the nucleus and other organelles	3.c
The brain consists of three major parts, called the cerebrum, cerebellum, and brain stem. You can see these three parts of the brain in Figure 20.5. You can use this interactive animation to explore these parts of the brain: http://s 1. The cerebrum is the largest part of the brain. It controls conscious functions, such as thinking, sensing, speaking, and voluntary muscle movements. Whether you are chatting with a friend or playing a video game, you are using your cerebrum. 2. The cerebellum is the next largest part of the brain. It controls body position, coordination, and balance. Hakeems cerebellum kicked in when he started to lose his balance on the railing in the opening photo. It allowed him to regain his balance. 3. The brain stem (also called the medulla) is the smallest part of the brain. It controls involuntary body functions such as breathing, heartbeat, and digestion. It also carries nerve impulses back and forth between the rest of the brain and the spinal cord. 	part of the brain that controls coordination and balance	4.b
The nervous system is made up of nerves. A nerve is a bundle of nerve cells. A nerve cell that carries messages is called a neuron. The messages carried by neurons are called nerve impulses. A nerve impulse can travel very quickly because it is an electrical signal. Think about flipping on a light switch when you enter a room. When you flip the switch, electricity flows to the light through wires inside the walls. The electricity may have to travel many meters to reach the light. Nonetheless, the light still comes on as soon as you flip the switch. Nerve impulses travel just as quickly through the network of nerves inside the body. 	part of a neuron that receives nerve impulses from other cells	5.d
The structure of a neuron suits it for its function of transmitting nerve impulses. You can see what a neuron looks like in Figure 20.2. It has a special shape that lets it pass electrical signals to and from other cells. A neuron has three main parts: cell body, dendrites, and axon. 1. The cell body contains the nucleus and other organelles. 2. Dendrites receive nerve impulses from other cells. A single neuron may have thousands of dendrites. 3. The axon passes on the nerve impulses to other cells. It branches at the end into multiple nerve endings so it can transmit impulses to many other cells. 	part of a neuron that passes on nerve impulses to other cells	6.a
The nervous system is made up of nerves. A nerve is a bundle of nerve cells. A nerve cell that carries messages is called a neuron. The messages carried by neurons are called nerve impulses. A nerve impulse can travel very quickly because it is an electrical signal. Think about flipping on a light switch when you enter a room. When you flip the switch, electricity flows to the light through wires inside the walls. The electricity may have to travel many meters to reach the light. Nonetheless, the light still comes on as soon as you flip the switch. Nerve impulses travel just as quickly through the network of nerves inside the body. 	electrical message carried by neurons	7.e
The function of the eye is to focus light and form images. We see some objects, such as stars and light bulbs, because they give off their own light. However, we see most objects because they reflect light from another source such as the sun. We form images of the objects when some of the reflected light enters our eyes. Look at the parts of the eye in Figure 20.12. Follow the path of light through the eye as you read about it below. 1. Light from an object passes first through the cornea. This is a clear, protective covering on the outside of the eye. 2. Then light passes through the pupil, an opening in the center of the eye. The pupil, which looks black, is surrounded by the colored part of the eye, called the iris. 3. Light entering through the pupil next passes through the lens. The lens is a clear, curved structure, like the lens of a magnifying glass. Along with the cornea, the lens focuses the light on the back of the eye. 4. The back of the eye is covered by a thin layer called the retina. This is where the image of the object normally forms. The retina consists of special light-sensing cells called rods and cones. Rods sense dim light. Cones sense different colors of light. 5. Nerve impulses from rods and cones travel to the optic nerve. It carries the nerve impulses to the brain. 	we see most objects because they reflect light from another source	true
The function of the eye is to focus light and form images. We see some objects, such as stars and light bulbs, because they give off their own light. However, we see most objects because they reflect light from another source such as the sun. We form images of the objects when some of the reflected light enters our eyes. Look at the parts of the eye in Figure 20.12. Follow the path of light through the eye as you read about it below. 1. Light from an object passes first through the cornea. This is a clear, protective covering on the outside of the eye. 2. Then light passes through the pupil, an opening in the center of the eye. The pupil, which looks black, is surrounded by the colored part of the eye, called the iris. 3. Light entering through the pupil next passes through the lens. The lens is a clear, curved structure, like the lens of a magnifying glass. Along with the cornea, the lens focuses the light on the back of the eye. 4. The back of the eye is covered by a thin layer called the retina. This is where the image of the object normally forms. The retina consists of special light-sensing cells called rods and cones. Rods sense dim light. Cones sense different colors of light. 5. Nerve impulses from rods and cones travel to the optic nerve. It carries the nerve impulses to the brain. 	the colored part of the eye is called the iris	true
You probably know people who need eyeglasses or contact lenses to see clearly. Maybe you need them yourself. Lenses are used to correct vision problems. Two of the most common vision problems in young people are myopia and hyperopia. You can compare myopia and hyperopia in Figure 20.13. To learn about astigmatism, another common vision problem, watch this very short video:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Myopia is commonly called nearsightedness. People with myopia can see nearby objects clearly, but distant objects appear blurry. Myopia occurs when images focus in front of the retina because the eyeball is too long. This vision problem can be corrected with concave lenses, which curve inward. The lenses focus images correctly on the retina. Hyperopia is commonly called farsightedness. People with hyperopia can see distant objects clearly, but nearby objects appear blurry. Hyperopia occurs when images focus in back of the retina because the eyeball is too short. This vision problem can be corrected with convex lenses, which curve outward. The lenses focus images correctly on the retina. 	hyperopia can be corrected with concave lenses	false
The ability to see is called vision. It depends on both the eyes and the brain. The eyes sense light and form images. The brain interprets the images formed by the eyes and tells us what we are seeing. For a fascinating account of how the brain helps us see, watch this short video:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the only function of the ears is to sense sound	false
The sense of taste is controlled by sensory neurons on the tongue. They are grouped in bundles called taste buds. You can see taste buds on the tongue in Figure 20.16. Taste neurons sense chemicals in food. They can detect five different tastes: sweet, salty, sour, bitter, and umami, which is a meaty taste. When taste neurons sense chemicals, they send messages to the brain about them. The brain then decides what you are tasting. The sense of smell also involves sensory neurons that sense chemicals. These neurons are found in the nose, and they sense chemicals in the air. Unlike taste neurons, smell neurons can detect thousands of different odors. Your sense of smell plays a big role in your sense of taste. You can use your sense of taste alone to learn that a food is sweet. However, you have to use your sense of smell as well to learn that the food tastes like apple pie. 	taste neurons on the tongue can detect thousands of different tastes	false
The sense of taste is controlled by sensory neurons on the tongue. They are grouped in bundles called taste buds. You can see taste buds on the tongue in Figure 20.16. Taste neurons sense chemicals in food. They can detect five different tastes: sweet, salty, sour, bitter, and umami, which is a meaty taste. When taste neurons sense chemicals, they send messages to the brain about them. The brain then decides what you are tasting. The sense of smell also involves sensory neurons that sense chemicals. These neurons are found in the nose, and they sense chemicals in the air. Unlike taste neurons, smell neurons can detect thousands of different odors. Your sense of smell plays a big role in your sense of taste. You can use your sense of taste alone to learn that a food is sweet. However, you have to use your sense of smell as well to learn that the food tastes like apple pie. 	sensory neurons in the nose sense chemicals in the air	true
The sense of taste is controlled by sensory neurons on the tongue. They are grouped in bundles called taste buds. You can see taste buds on the tongue in Figure 20.16. Taste neurons sense chemicals in food. They can detect five different tastes: sweet, salty, sour, bitter, and umami, which is a meaty taste. When taste neurons sense chemicals, they send messages to the brain about them. The brain then decides what you are tasting. The sense of smell also involves sensory neurons that sense chemicals. These neurons are found in the nose, and they sense chemicals in the air. Unlike taste neurons, smell neurons can detect thousands of different odors. Your sense of smell plays a big role in your sense of taste. You can use your sense of taste alone to learn that a food is sweet. However, you have to use your sense of smell as well to learn that the food tastes like apple pie. 	the sense of smell plays an important role in the sense of taste	true
What do listening to music and riding a bike have in common? Both activities depend on the ears. The ears are organs that sense sound. They also sense the position of the body and help maintain balance. Hearing is the ability to sense sound. Sound travels through the air in waves. Suppose a car horn blows in the distance. Sound waves spread through the air from the horn. Some of the sound waves enter your ears and cause vibrations. The vibrations trigger nerve impulses that travel to the brain through the auditory nerve. You can learn how this happens in Figure 20.15. The brain then interprets the impulses and tells you what you are hearing. To find out how the brain determines where a sound is coming from, watch this amusing video:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  The parts of the ears involved in balance are the semicircular canals. These are the curved structures above the cochlea in the inner ear in Figure 20.15. Like the cochlea, the semicircular canals contain liquid and are lined with tiny hair cells. As the head changes position, the liquid moves. This causes the hair cells to bend. The bending of the hair cells triggers nerve impulses that travel to the cerebellum in the brain. The cerebellum uses the information to maintain balance. 	structure in the inner ear that responds to vibrations by sending nerve impulses to the auditory nerve	1.f
The function of the eye is to focus light and form images. We see some objects, such as stars and light bulbs, because they give off their own light. However, we see most objects because they reflect light from another source such as the sun. We form images of the objects when some of the reflected light enters our eyes. Look at the parts of the eye in Figure 20.12. Follow the path of light through the eye as you read about it below. 1. Light from an object passes first through the cornea. This is a clear, protective covering on the outside of the eye. 2. Then light passes through the pupil, an opening in the center of the eye. The pupil, which looks black, is surrounded by the colored part of the eye, called the iris. 3. Light entering through the pupil next passes through the lens. The lens is a clear, curved structure, like the lens of a magnifying glass. Along with the cornea, the lens focuses the light on the back of the eye. 4. The back of the eye is covered by a thin layer called the retina. This is where the image of the object normally forms. The retina consists of special light-sensing cells called rods and cones. Rods sense dim light. Cones sense different colors of light. 5. Nerve impulses from rods and cones travel to the optic nerve. It carries the nerve impulses to the brain. 	opening in the center of the eye that lets light pass through	2.c
You probably know people who need eyeglasses or contact lenses to see clearly. Maybe you need them yourself. Lenses are used to correct vision problems. Two of the most common vision problems in young people are myopia and hyperopia. You can compare myopia and hyperopia in Figure 20.13. To learn about astigmatism, another common vision problem, watch this very short video:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Myopia is commonly called nearsightedness. People with myopia can see nearby objects clearly, but distant objects appear blurry. Myopia occurs when images focus in front of the retina because the eyeball is too long. This vision problem can be corrected with concave lenses, which curve inward. The lenses focus images correctly on the retina. Hyperopia is commonly called farsightedness. People with hyperopia can see distant objects clearly, but nearby objects appear blurry. Hyperopia occurs when images focus in back of the retina because the eyeball is too short. This vision problem can be corrected with convex lenses, which curve outward. The lenses focus images correctly on the retina. 	vision problem in which distant objects can be seen clearly but nearby objects appear blurry	3.b
The function of the eye is to focus light and form images. We see some objects, such as stars and light bulbs, because they give off their own light. However, we see most objects because they reflect light from another source such as the sun. We form images of the objects when some of the reflected light enters our eyes. Look at the parts of the eye in Figure 20.12. Follow the path of light through the eye as you read about it below. 1. Light from an object passes first through the cornea. This is a clear, protective covering on the outside of the eye. 2. Then light passes through the pupil, an opening in the center of the eye. The pupil, which looks black, is surrounded by the colored part of the eye, called the iris. 3. Light entering through the pupil next passes through the lens. The lens is a clear, curved structure, like the lens of a magnifying glass. Along with the cornea, the lens focuses the light on the back of the eye. 4. The back of the eye is covered by a thin layer called the retina. This is where the image of the object normally forms. The retina consists of special light-sensing cells called rods and cones. Rods sense dim light. Cones sense different colors of light. 5. Nerve impulses from rods and cones travel to the optic nerve. It carries the nerve impulses to the brain. 	layer of cells at the back of the eye where images normally form	4.a
The ability to see is called vision. It depends on both the eyes and the brain. The eyes sense light and form images. The brain interprets the images formed by the eyes and tells us what we are seeing. For a fascinating account of how the brain helps us see, watch this short video:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	if you lost vision in one eye you could still see in three dimensions	false
The function of the eye is to focus light and form images. We see some objects, such as stars and light bulbs, because they give off their own light. However, we see most objects because they reflect light from another source such as the sun. We form images of the objects when some of the reflected light enters our eyes. Look at the parts of the eye in Figure 20.12. Follow the path of light through the eye as you read about it below. 1. Light from an object passes first through the cornea. This is a clear, protective covering on the outside of the eye. 2. Then light passes through the pupil, an opening in the center of the eye. The pupil, which looks black, is surrounded by the colored part of the eye, called the iris. 3. Light entering through the pupil next passes through the lens. The lens is a clear, curved structure, like the lens of a magnifying glass. Along with the cornea, the lens focuses the light on the back of the eye. 4. The back of the eye is covered by a thin layer called the retina. This is where the image of the object normally forms. The retina consists of special light-sensing cells called rods and cones. Rods sense dim light. Cones sense different colors of light. 5. Nerve impulses from rods and cones travel to the optic nerve. It carries the nerve impulses to the brain. 	when light reaches the eye it passes first through the iris	false
You probably know people who need eyeglasses or contact lenses to see clearly. Maybe you need them yourself. Lenses are used to correct vision problems. Two of the most common vision problems in young people are myopia and hyperopia. You can compare myopia and hyperopia in Figure 20.13. To learn about astigmatism, another common vision problem, watch this very short video:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Myopia is commonly called nearsightedness. People with myopia can see nearby objects clearly, but distant objects appear blurry. Myopia occurs when images focus in front of the retina because the eyeball is too long. This vision problem can be corrected with concave lenses, which curve inward. The lenses focus images correctly on the retina. Hyperopia is commonly called farsightedness. People with hyperopia can see distant objects clearly, but nearby objects appear blurry. Hyperopia occurs when images focus in back of the retina because the eyeball is too short. This vision problem can be corrected with convex lenses, which curve outward. The lenses focus images correctly on the retina. 	vision problem in which nearby objects can be seen clearly but distant objects appear blurry	5.g
What do listening to music and riding a bike have in common? Both activities depend on the ears. The ears are organs that sense sound. They also sense the position of the body and help maintain balance. Hearing is the ability to sense sound. Sound travels through the air in waves. Suppose a car horn blows in the distance. Sound waves spread through the air from the horn. Some of the sound waves enter your ears and cause vibrations. The vibrations trigger nerve impulses that travel to the brain through the auditory nerve. You can learn how this happens in Figure 20.15. The brain then interprets the impulses and tells you what you are hearing. To find out how the brain determines where a sound is coming from, watch this amusing video:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  The parts of the ears involved in balance are the semicircular canals. These are the curved structures above the cochlea in the inner ear in Figure 20.15. Like the cochlea, the semicircular canals contain liquid and are lined with tiny hair cells. As the head changes position, the liquid moves. This causes the hair cells to bend. The bending of the hair cells triggers nerve impulses that travel to the cerebellum in the brain. The cerebellum uses the information to maintain balance. 	the middle ear contains the cochlea and semicircular canals	false
What do listening to music and riding a bike have in common? Both activities depend on the ears. The ears are organs that sense sound. They also sense the position of the body and help maintain balance. Hearing is the ability to sense sound. Sound travels through the air in waves. Suppose a car horn blows in the distance. Sound waves spread through the air from the horn. Some of the sound waves enter your ears and cause vibrations. The vibrations trigger nerve impulses that travel to the brain through the auditory nerve. You can learn how this happens in Figure 20.15. The brain then interprets the impulses and tells you what you are hearing. To find out how the brain determines where a sound is coming from, watch this amusing video:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  The parts of the ears involved in balance are the semicircular canals. These are the curved structures above the cochlea in the inner ear in Figure 20.15. Like the cochlea, the semicircular canals contain liquid and are lined with tiny hair cells. As the head changes position, the liquid moves. This causes the hair cells to bend. The bending of the hair cells triggers nerve impulses that travel to the cerebellum in the brain. The cerebellum uses the information to maintain balance. 	structure in the inner ear involved in maintaining balance	6.d
The sense of taste is controlled by sensory neurons on the tongue. They are grouped in bundles called taste buds. You can see taste buds on the tongue in Figure 20.16. Taste neurons sense chemicals in food. They can detect five different tastes: sweet, salty, sour, bitter, and umami, which is a meaty taste. When taste neurons sense chemicals, they send messages to the brain about them. The brain then decides what you are tasting. The sense of smell also involves sensory neurons that sense chemicals. These neurons are found in the nose, and they sense chemicals in the air. Unlike taste neurons, smell neurons can detect thousands of different odors. Your sense of smell plays a big role in your sense of taste. You can use your sense of taste alone to learn that a food is sweet. However, you have to use your sense of smell as well to learn that the food tastes like apple pie. 	bundle of sensory neurons on the tongue that sense chemicals in food	7.e
Touch is the ability to sense pain, pressure, or temperature. Nerve cells that sense touch are found mainly in the skin. The skin on the palms, soles, face, and lips has the most neurons. Neurons that sense pain are also found inside the body inside the body in the tongue, joints, muscles, and other organs. Suppose you wanted to test the temperature of bath water before getting into the tub. You might stick one toe in the water. Neurons in the skin on your toe would sense the temperature of the water and send a message about it to the brain through the spinal cord. The brain would process the information. It might decide that the water is too hot and send a message to your muscles to pull your toe out of the water. 	nerve cells that sense touch are most numerous in the skin	true
The function of the eye is to focus light and form images. We see some objects, such as stars and light bulbs, because they give off their own light. However, we see most objects because they reflect light from another source such as the sun. We form images of the objects when some of the reflected light enters our eyes. Look at the parts of the eye in Figure 20.12. Follow the path of light through the eye as you read about it below. 1. Light from an object passes first through the cornea. This is a clear, protective covering on the outside of the eye. 2. Then light passes through the pupil, an opening in the center of the eye. The pupil, which looks black, is surrounded by the colored part of the eye, called the iris. 3. Light entering through the pupil next passes through the lens. The lens is a clear, curved structure, like the lens of a magnifying glass. Along with the cornea, the lens focuses the light on the back of the eye. 4. The back of the eye is covered by a thin layer called the retina. This is where the image of the object normally forms. The retina consists of special light-sensing cells called rods and cones. Rods sense dim light. Cones sense different colors of light. 5. Nerve impulses from rods and cones travel to the optic nerve. It carries the nerve impulses to the brain. 	rods are lightsensing cells in the eye that can sense dim light	true
An endocrine gland is a gland that secretes hormones into the bloodstream for transport around the body (instead of secreting hormones locally, like sweat glands in the skin). Major glands of the endocrine system are shown in Figure 20.17. The glands are the same in males and females except for the ovaries and testes. 	messenger molecule released by an endocrine gland	1.d
Endocrine hormones travel throughout the body in the blood. However, each endocrine hormone affects only certain cells, called target cells. 	pancreatic hormone that helps cells absorb glucose from the blood	2.c
An endocrine gland is a gland that secretes hormones into the bloodstream for transport around the body (instead of secreting hormones locally, like sweat glands in the skin). Major glands of the endocrine system are shown in Figure 20.17. The glands are the same in males and females except for the ovaries and testes. 	any gland that secretes hormones into the bloodstream	3.e
An endocrine gland is a gland that secretes hormones into the bloodstream for transport around the body (instead of secreting hormones locally, like sweat glands in the skin). Major glands of the endocrine system are shown in Figure 20.17. The glands are the same in males and females except for the ovaries and testes. 	gland that secretes sex hormones	4.b
The hypothalamus is actually part of the brain, but it also secretes hormones. Some of its hormones go directly to the pituitary gland in the endocrine system. These hypothalamus hormones tell the pituitary to either secrete or stop secreting its hormones. In this way, the hypothalamus provides a link between the nervous and endocrine systems. The hypothalamus also produces hormones that directly regulate body processes. For example, it produces antid- iuretic hormone. This hormone travels to the kidneys and stimulates them to conserve water by producing more concentrated urine. 	part of the brain that secretes hormones affecting the pituitary gland	5.a
The pea-sized pituitary gland is just below the hypothalamus and attached directly to it. The pituitary receives hormones from the hypothalamus. It also secretes its own hormones. Most pituitary hormones control other endocrine glands. Thats why the pituitary gland is called the master gland of the endocrine system. Table Pituitary Hormone Adrenocorticotropic (ACTH) hormone Target Glands/Cells adrenal glands Thyroid-stimulating (TSH) Growth hormone (GH) hormone thyroid gland Follicle-stimulating (FSH) hormone body cells ovaries or testes Luteinizing hormone (LH) ovaries or testes Prolactin (PRL) mammary glands Effects(s) Stimulates the cortex (outer layer) of the adrenal glands to secrete their hormones Stimulates the thyroid gland to se- crete its hormones Stimulates body cells to make pro- teins and grow Stimulates the ovaries to develop mature eggs; stimulates the testes to produce sperm Stimulates the ovaries or testes to secrete sex hormones; stimulates the ovaries to release eggs Stimulates the mammary glands to produce milk 	pituitary hormone that stimulates the mammary glands to produce milk	6.f
An endocrine gland is a gland that secretes hormones into the bloodstream for transport around the body (instead of secreting hormones locally, like sweat glands in the skin). Major glands of the endocrine system are shown in Figure 20.17. The glands are the same in males and females except for the ovaries and testes. 	master gland of the endocrine system	7.g
Endocrine hormones travel throughout the body in the blood. However, each endocrine hormone affects only certain cells, called target cells. 	folliclestimulating hormone is secreted by the gonads	false
An endocrine gland is a gland that secretes hormones into the bloodstream for transport around the body (instead of secreting hormones locally, like sweat glands in the skin). Major glands of the endocrine system are shown in Figure 20.17. The glands are the same in males and females except for the ovaries and testes. 	the thymus gland is part of the endocrine system	true
Endocrine hormones travel throughout the body in the blood. However, each endocrine hormone affects only certain cells, called target cells. 	the output of most endocrine hormones is controlled by positive feedback loops	false
Diseases of the endocrine system are fairly common. An endocrine disease usually involves the secretion of too much or not enough hormone by an endocrine gland. This may happen because the gland develops an abnormal lump of cells called a tumor. For example, a tumor of the pituitary gland can cause secretion of too much growth hormone. If this occurs in a child, it may result in very rapid growth and unusual tallness by adulthood. This is called gigantism. Type 1 diabetes is another endocrine system disease. In this disease, the bodys own immune system attacks insulin- secreting cells of the pancreas. As a result, not enough insulin is secreted to maintain normal levels of glucose in the blood. Patients with type 1 diabetes must regularly check the level of glucose in their blood. When it gets too high, they must give themselves an injection of insulin to bring it under control. You can learn more about glucose, insulin, and type 1 diabetes by watching this video:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	type 1 diabetes occurs when the immune system attacks cells of the adrenal glands	false
Endocrine hormones travel throughout the body in the blood. However, each endocrine hormone affects only certain cells, called target cells. 	the hormone adrenaline prepares the body for emergencies	true
Endocrine hormones travel throughout the body in the blood. However, each endocrine hormone affects only certain cells, called target cells. 	endocrine hormones travel more slowly than nerve impulses	true
Endocrine hormones travel throughout the body in the blood. However, each endocrine hormone affects only certain cells, called target cells. 	endocrine hormones affect only nearby cells	false
An endocrine gland is a gland that secretes hormones into the bloodstream for transport around the body (instead of secreting hormones locally, like sweat glands in the skin). Major glands of the endocrine system are shown in Figure 20.17. The glands are the same in males and females except for the ovaries and testes. 	the pineal gland is part of the endocrine system	true
The hypothalamus is actually part of the brain, but it also secretes hormones. Some of its hormones go directly to the pituitary gland in the endocrine system. These hypothalamus hormones tell the pituitary to either secrete or stop secreting its hormones. In this way, the hypothalamus provides a link between the nervous and endocrine systems. The hypothalamus also produces hormones that directly regulate body processes. For example, it produces antid- iuretic hormone. This hormone travels to the kidneys and stimulates them to conserve water by producing more concentrated urine. 	all hormones released by the hypothalamus control the pituitary gland	false
The hypothalamus is actually part of the brain, but it also secretes hormones. Some of its hormones go directly to the pituitary gland in the endocrine system. These hypothalamus hormones tell the pituitary to either secrete or stop secreting its hormones. In this way, the hypothalamus provides a link between the nervous and endocrine systems. The hypothalamus also produces hormones that directly regulate body processes. For example, it produces antid- iuretic hormone. This hormone travels to the kidneys and stimulates them to conserve water by producing more concentrated urine. 	the pituitary gland is located in the neck	false
Endocrine hormones travel throughout the body in the blood. However, each endocrine hormone affects only certain cells, called target cells. 	growth hormone stimulates cells to make proteins	true
Endocrine hormones travel throughout the body in the blood. However, each endocrine hormone affects only certain cells, called target cells. 	luteinizing hormone is secreted by the gonads	false
Different pathogens spread in different ways. Some are easy to catch. Others are much less contagious. Some pathogens spread through food or water. When harmful bacteria contaminate food, they cause foodborne illness, commonly called food poisoning. An example of a pathogen that spreads through water is the protozoan named Giardia lamblia, described in Table 21.1. It causes a disease called giardiasis. Some pathogens spread through sexual contact. In the U.S., the pathogen most commonly spread this way is HPV, or human papillomavirus. It may cause genital warts and certain types of cancer. A vaccine can prevent the spread of this pathogen. Many pathogens spread by droplets in the air. Droplets are released when a person coughs or sneezes, as you can see in Figure 21.2. The droplets may be loaded with pathogens. Other people may get sick if they breathe in the pathogens on the droplets. Viruses that cause colds and flu can spread this way. Other pathogens spread when they are deposited on objects or surfaces. The fungus that causes athletes food spreads this way. For example, you might pick up the fungus from the floor of a public shower. You can also pick up viruses for colds and flu from doorknobs and other commonly touched surfaces. Still other pathogens are spread by vectors. A vector is an organism that carries pathogens from one person or animal to another. Most vectors are insects such as ticks or mosquitoes. They pick up pathogens when they bite an infected animal and then transmit the pathogens to the next animal they bite. Ticks spread the bacteria that cause Lyme disease. Mosquitoes spread the protozoa that cause malaria. 	schistosoma is a human parasite that is spread by a vector	false
An infectious disease is a disease that is caused by a pathogen. A pathogen is an organism or virus that causes disease in another living thing. Pathogens are commonly called germs. Watch this dramatic video for an historic perspective on infectious diseases and their causes:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	an example of a bacterium that may cause human disease is escherichia coli	true
There are several types of pathogens that cause diseases in human beings. They include bacteria, viruses, fungi, and protozoa. The different types are described in Table 21.1. The table also lists several diseases caused by each type of pathogen. Many infectious diseases caused by these pathogens can be cured with medicines. For example, antibiotic drugs can cure most diseases caused by bacteria. 	human viral infections include tetanus and measles	false
Different pathogens spread in different ways. Some are easy to catch. Others are much less contagious. Some pathogens spread through food or water. When harmful bacteria contaminate food, they cause foodborne illness, commonly called food poisoning. An example of a pathogen that spreads through water is the protozoan named Giardia lamblia, described in Table 21.1. It causes a disease called giardiasis. Some pathogens spread through sexual contact. In the U.S., the pathogen most commonly spread this way is HPV, or human papillomavirus. It may cause genital warts and certain types of cancer. A vaccine can prevent the spread of this pathogen. Many pathogens spread by droplets in the air. Droplets are released when a person coughs or sneezes, as you can see in Figure 21.2. The droplets may be loaded with pathogens. Other people may get sick if they breathe in the pathogens on the droplets. Viruses that cause colds and flu can spread this way. Other pathogens spread when they are deposited on objects or surfaces. The fungus that causes athletes food spreads this way. For example, you might pick up the fungus from the floor of a public shower. You can also pick up viruses for colds and flu from doorknobs and other commonly touched surfaces. Still other pathogens are spread by vectors. A vector is an organism that carries pathogens from one person or animal to another. Most vectors are insects such as ticks or mosquitoes. They pick up pathogens when they bite an infected animal and then transmit the pathogens to the next animal they bite. Ticks spread the bacteria that cause Lyme disease. Mosquitoes spread the protozoa that cause malaria. 	a common human fungal infection is genital herpes	false
What can you do to avoid infectious diseases? Eating well and getting plenty of sleep are a good start. These habits will help keep your immune system healthy. With a healthy immune system, you will be able to fight off many pathogens. Vaccines are available for some infectious diseases. For example, there are vaccines to prevent measles, mumps, whooping cough, and chicken pox. These vaccines are recommended for infants and young children. You can also take the following steps to avoid picking up pathogens or spreading them to others. Watch this video for additional information on preventing the spread of infectious diseases:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Wash your hands often with soap and water. Spend at least 20 seconds scrubbing with soap. See Figure 21.3 for effective hand washing tips. Avoid touching your eyes, nose, or mouth with unwashed hands. Avoid close contact with people who are sick. This includes kissing, hugging, shaking hands, and sharing cups or eating utensils. Cover your coughs and sneezes with a tissue or shirt sleeve, not your hands. Disinfect frequently touched surfaces, such as keyboards and doorknobs, especially if someone is sick. Stay home when you are sick. The best way to prevent diseases spread by vectors is to avoid contact with the vectors. For example, you can wear long sleeves and long pants to avoid tick and mosquito bites. Using insect repellent can also reduce your risk of insect bites. 	when you cough or sneeze you should cover your mouth and nose with your hand	false
What can you do to avoid infectious diseases? Eating well and getting plenty of sleep are a good start. These habits will help keep your immune system healthy. With a healthy immune system, you will be able to fight off many pathogens. Vaccines are available for some infectious diseases. For example, there are vaccines to prevent measles, mumps, whooping cough, and chicken pox. These vaccines are recommended for infants and young children. You can also take the following steps to avoid picking up pathogens or spreading them to others. Watch this video for additional information on preventing the spread of infectious diseases:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Wash your hands often with soap and water. Spend at least 20 seconds scrubbing with soap. See Figure 21.3 for effective hand washing tips. Avoid touching your eyes, nose, or mouth with unwashed hands. Avoid close contact with people who are sick. This includes kissing, hugging, shaking hands, and sharing cups or eating utensils. Cover your coughs and sneezes with a tissue or shirt sleeve, not your hands. Disinfect frequently touched surfaces, such as keyboards and doorknobs, especially if someone is sick. Stay home when you are sick. The best way to prevent diseases spread by vectors is to avoid contact with the vectors. For example, you can wear long sleeves and long pants to avoid tick and mosquito bites. Using insect repellent can also reduce your risk of insect bites. 	the best way to prevent diseases spread by vectors to is avoid contact with the vectors	true
There are several types of pathogens that cause diseases in human beings. They include bacteria, viruses, fungi, and protozoa. The different types are described in Table 21.1. The table also lists several diseases caused by each type of pathogen. Many infectious diseases caused by these pathogens can be cured with medicines. For example, antibiotic drugs can cure most diseases caused by bacteria. 	travelers diarrhea is generally caused by protozoa	true
An infectious disease is a disease that is caused by a pathogen. A pathogen is an organism or virus that causes disease in another living thing. Pathogens are commonly called germs. Watch this dramatic video for an historic perspective on infectious diseases and their causes:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	infectious diseases are contagious because they are caused by pathogens	true
An infectious disease is a disease that is caused by a pathogen. A pathogen is an organism or virus that causes disease in another living thing. Pathogens are commonly called germs. Watch this dramatic video for an historic perspective on infectious diseases and their causes:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	you can pick up the virus that causes the common cold from an object such as a doorknob	true
What can you do to avoid infectious diseases? Eating well and getting plenty of sleep are a good start. These habits will help keep your immune system healthy. With a healthy immune system, you will be able to fight off many pathogens. Vaccines are available for some infectious diseases. For example, there are vaccines to prevent measles, mumps, whooping cough, and chicken pox. These vaccines are recommended for infants and young children. You can also take the following steps to avoid picking up pathogens or spreading them to others. Watch this video for additional information on preventing the spread of infectious diseases:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Wash your hands often with soap and water. Spend at least 20 seconds scrubbing with soap. See Figure 21.3 for effective hand washing tips. Avoid touching your eyes, nose, or mouth with unwashed hands. Avoid close contact with people who are sick. This includes kissing, hugging, shaking hands, and sharing cups or eating utensils. Cover your coughs and sneezes with a tissue or shirt sleeve, not your hands. Disinfect frequently touched surfaces, such as keyboards and doorknobs, especially if someone is sick. Stay home when you are sick. The best way to prevent diseases spread by vectors is to avoid contact with the vectors. For example, you can wear long sleeves and long pants to avoid tick and mosquito bites. Using insect repellent can also reduce your risk of insect bites. 	the proper way to wash your hands is to scrub with soap for at least 20 seconds	true
An infectious disease is a disease that is caused by a pathogen. A pathogen is an organism or virus that causes disease in another living thing. Pathogens are commonly called germs. Watch this dramatic video for an historic perspective on infectious diseases and their causes:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	a disease that can potentially be cured with antibiotics is strep throat	true
An infectious disease is a disease that is caused by a pathogen. A pathogen is an organism or virus that causes disease in another living thing. Pathogens are commonly called germs. Watch this dramatic video for an historic perspective on infectious diseases and their causes:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	athletes foot is a common infectious disease caused by protozoa	false
An infectious disease is a disease that is caused by a pathogen. A pathogen is an organism or virus that causes disease in another living thing. Pathogens are commonly called germs. Watch this dramatic video for an historic perspective on infectious diseases and their causes:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	any organism that carries pathogens from one organism to another	1.d
An infectious disease is a disease that is caused by a pathogen. A pathogen is an organism or virus that causes disease in another living thing. Pathogens are commonly called germs. Watch this dramatic video for an historic perspective on infectious diseases and their causes:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	any disease that is caused by pathogens	2.e
There are several types of pathogens that cause diseases in human beings. They include bacteria, viruses, fungi, and protozoa. The different types are described in Table 21.1. The table also lists several diseases caused by each type of pathogen. Many infectious diseases caused by these pathogens can be cured with medicines. For example, antibiotic drugs can cure most diseases caused by bacteria. 	type of drug that is used to cure bacterial diseases	3.g
An infectious disease is a disease that is caused by a pathogen. A pathogen is an organism or virus that causes disease in another living thing. Pathogens are commonly called germs. Watch this dramatic video for an historic perspective on infectious diseases and their causes:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	substance that is used to prevent certain infectious diseases	4.b
There are several types of pathogens that cause diseases in human beings. They include bacteria, viruses, fungi, and protozoa. The different types are described in Table 21.1. The table also lists several diseases caused by each type of pathogen. Many infectious diseases caused by these pathogens can be cured with medicines. For example, antibiotic drugs can cure most diseases caused by bacteria. 	type of organisms that cause malaria and giardiasis	5.f
An infectious disease is a disease that is caused by a pathogen. A pathogen is an organism or virus that causes disease in another living thing. Pathogens are commonly called germs. Watch this dramatic video for an historic perspective on infectious diseases and their causes:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	any organism or virus that causes disease in another living thing	6. a
An infectious disease is a disease that is caused by a pathogen. A pathogen is an organism or virus that causes disease in another living thing. Pathogens are commonly called germs. Watch this dramatic video for an historic perspective on infectious diseases and their causes:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	particle that reproduces by taking over living cells	7. c
Cancer occurs most often in adults, especially adults over the age of 50. The most common types of cancer in adults differ between males and females. The most common type of cancer in adult males is cancer of the prostate gland. The prostate gland is part of the male reproductive system. About one third of all cancers in men are prostate cancers. The most common type of cancer in adult females is cancer of the breast. About one third of all cancers in women are breast cancers. In both men and women, the second most common type of cancer is lung cancer. Most cases of lung cancer develop in people who smoke. Childhood cancer is rare. The main type of cancer in children is leukemia. It makes up about one third of all childhood cancers. It occurs when the body makes abnormal white blood cells. 	cancer in childhood is rare	true
Many cases of cancer can be cured if the cancer is diagnosed and treated early. Treatment often involves removing a tumor with surgery. This may be followed by other types of treatments. These treatments may include drugs and radiation, both of which target and kill cancer cells. Its important to know the warning signs of cancer so it can be diagnosed as early as possible. Having warning signs doesnt mean that you have cancer, but you should check with a doctor to be sure. Warning signs of cancer include: a change in bowel or bladder habits. a sore that doesnt heal. unusual bleeding or discharge. a lump in the breast or elsewhere. frequent, long-term indigestion. difficulty swallowing. obvious changes in a wart or mole. persistent cough or hoarseness. 	warning signs of cancer include difficulty swallowing	true
Making healthy lifestyle choices can help prevent some types of cancer. For example, you can reduce your risk of lung cancer by not smoking. You can reduce your risk of skin cancer by using sunscreen (see Figure 21.6). 	surgery is the only way to treat cancer	false
Type 1 diabetes is caused by the immune system attacking and destroying normal cells of the pancreas. As a result, the cells can no longer produce insulin. Why the immune system acts this way is not known for certain. Its possible that a virus may trigger the attack. This type of diabetes usually develops in childhood or adolescence. At present, there is no known way to prevent the development of type 1 diabetes. However, it is a treatable disease. Treatment of type 1 diabetes includes: taking several insulin injections every day or using an insulin pump (see Figure 21.7). monitoring blood glucose levels several times a day. eating a healthy diet that spreads out carbohydrate intake throughout the day. regular physical activity, which helps the body use insulin more efficiently. regular medical checkups. 	type 1 diabetes usually develops in childhood or adolescence	true
Type 2 diabetes is much more common than type 1 diabetes. Type 2 diabetes occurs when body cells no longer respond normally to insulin. The pancreas still makes insulin, but the cells of the body cant use it. Being overweight and having high blood pressure increase the chances of developing type 2 diabetes. This type of diabetes usually develops in adulthood. However, it is becoming more common in teens and children because more young people are overweight now than ever before. You can greatly reduce your risk of developing type 2 diabetes by maintaining a healthy body weight. Some cases of type 2 diabetes can be cured with weight loss. However, most people with the disease need to take medicine to control their blood glucose. Regular exercise and balanced eating also help. Like people with type 1 diabetes, people with type 2 diabetes must frequently check their blood glucose. 	your risk of developing type 2 diabetes is greater if you are overweight	true
An autoimmune disease is a disease in which the immune system attacks the bodys own cells. Why this happens is not known for certain, but a combination of genetic and environmental factors are likely to be responsible. Type 1 diabetes is an example of an autoimmune disease. In this case, the immune system attacks cells of the pancreas. Two other examples are multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis. In multiple sclerosis, the immune system attacks nerve cells. This causes weakness and pain that gradually get worse over time. In rheumatoid arthritis, the immune system attacks joints. This causes joint damage and pain. These diseases cant be prevented and have no known cure. However, they can be treated with medicines that weaken the immune systems attack on normal cells. 	in multiple sclerosis the immune system attacks the joints	false
The immune system is the body system that normally fights infections and defends against other causes of disease. When the immune system is working well, it usually keeps you from getting sick. But like any other body system, the immune system can have problems and develop diseases. Two types of immune system diseases are autoimmune diseases and allergies. 	hay fever is a noninfectious disease characterized by a high fever	false
Cancer is a disease in which cells divide out of control. Normally, the body has ways to prevent cells from dividing out of control. However, in the case of cancer, these ways fail. The rapidly dividing cells may form a mass of abnormal tissue called a tumor. This is illustrated in Figure 21.4. Watch this video for an animated introduction to cancer:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  As a tumor increases in size, it may harm normal tissues around it. Sometimes cancer cells break away from a tumor. If they enter the bloodstream, they are carried throughout the body. Then the cells may start growing in other tissues. This is usually how cancer spreads from one part of the body to another. Once this happens, cancer is very hard to stop. 	mass of abnormal tissue formed by cancer cells	1.g
The immune system is the body system that normally fights infections and defends against other causes of disease. When the immune system is working well, it usually keeps you from getting sick. But like any other body system, the immune system can have problems and develop diseases. Two types of immune system diseases are autoimmune diseases and allergies. 	any disease that is not contagious	2.d
Type 2 diabetes is much more common than type 1 diabetes. Type 2 diabetes occurs when body cells no longer respond normally to insulin. The pancreas still makes insulin, but the cells of the body cant use it. Being overweight and having high blood pressure increase the chances of developing type 2 diabetes. This type of diabetes usually develops in adulthood. However, it is becoming more common in teens and children because more young people are overweight now than ever before. You can greatly reduce your risk of developing type 2 diabetes by maintaining a healthy body weight. Some cases of type 2 diabetes can be cured with weight loss. However, most people with the disease need to take medicine to control their blood glucose. Regular exercise and balanced eating also help. Like people with type 1 diabetes, people with type 2 diabetes must frequently check their blood glucose. 	disease in which the level of glucose in the blood is too high	3.f
Making healthy lifestyle choices can help prevent some types of cancer. For example, you can reduce your risk of lung cancer by not smoking. You can reduce your risk of skin cancer by using sunscreen (see Figure 21.6). 	anything in the environment that may cause cancer	4.b
An allergy is a disorder in which the immune system responds to a harmless substance as though it was a pathogen. Any substance that causes an allergy is called an allergen. The most common allergens are pollen, dust mites, mold, animal dander, insect stings, latex, and certain foods and medications. To see in greater detail how allergies occur, watch this animated video:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Did you ever hear of hay fever? Its not really a fever, and it may have nothing to do with hay. Its actually an allergy to plant pollens. People with this type of allergy generally have seasonal allergies that come back year after year. Symptoms commonly include watery eyes and nasal congestion. Ragweed, shown blooming in Figure 21.8, causes more pollen allergies than any other plant. Allergy symptoms can range from mild to severe. Mild symptoms might include itchy eyes, sneezing, and a runny nose. Severe symptoms can cause difficulty breathing, which may be life threatening. Keep in mind that it is the immune system and not the allergen that causes the allergy symptoms. Allergy symptoms can be treated with medications such as antihistamines. Severe allergic reactions may require an injection of the hormone epinephrine. These treatments lessen or counter the immune systems response. Often, allergy symptoms can be prevented. One way is to avoid exposure to the allergens that cause your symptoms. If you are allergic to pollen, for example, you can reduce your exposure by staying inside when pollen levels are highest. Some people receive allergy shots to help prevent allergic reactions. The shots contain tiny amounts of allergens. After many months or years of shots, the immune system gets used to the allergens and no longer reacts to them. 	any substance that may cause an allergy	5.e
Cancer is a disease in which cells divide out of control. Normally, the body has ways to prevent cells from dividing out of control. However, in the case of cancer, these ways fail. The rapidly dividing cells may form a mass of abnormal tissue called a tumor. This is illustrated in Figure 21.4. Watch this video for an animated introduction to cancer:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  As a tumor increases in size, it may harm normal tissues around it. Sometimes cancer cells break away from a tumor. If they enter the bloodstream, they are carried throughout the body. Then the cells may start growing in other tissues. This is usually how cancer spreads from one part of the body to another. Once this happens, cancer is very hard to stop. 	disease in which cells divide out of control	6.c
The immune system is the body system that normally fights infections and defends against other causes of disease. When the immune system is working well, it usually keeps you from getting sick. But like any other body system, the immune system can have problems and develop diseases. Two types of immune system diseases are autoimmune diseases and allergies. 	any disease caused by the immune system attacking the bodys own cells	7.a
Sperm are tiny cells. In fact, they are the smallest of all human cells. They have a structure that suits them well to perform their function. 	tube that carries sperm from the epididymis to the urethra	1.b
The male reproductive system has two main functions: producing sperm and releasing testosterone. Sperm are male gametes, or reproductive cells. Sperm form when certain cells in the male reproductive system divide by meiosis to form haploid cells. Being haploid means they have half the number of chromosomes of other cells in the body. An adult male may produce millions of sperm each day! Testosterone is the major sex hormone in males. Testosterone has two primary roles: 1. During adolescence, testosterone causes most of the changes associated with puberty. It causes the reproduc- tive organs to mature. It also causes other adult male traits to develop. For example, it causes the voice to deepen and facial hair to start growing. 2. During adulthood, testosterone is needed for the production of sperm. 	major male sex hormone	2.g
Sperm are tiny cells. In fact, they are the smallest of all human cells. They have a structure that suits them well to perform their function. 	whitish fluid that contains sperm	3.f
The male reproductive system has two main functions: producing sperm and releasing testosterone. Sperm are male gametes, or reproductive cells. Sperm form when certain cells in the male reproductive system divide by meiosis to form haploid cells. Being haploid means they have half the number of chromosomes of other cells in the body. An adult male may produce millions of sperm each day! Testosterone is the major sex hormone in males. Testosterone has two primary roles: 1. During adolescence, testosterone causes most of the changes associated with puberty. It causes the reproduc- tive organs to mature. It also causes other adult male traits to develop. For example, it causes the voice to deepen and facial hair to start growing. 2. During adulthood, testosterone is needed for the production of sperm. 	male sex cell	4.d
Sperm are tiny cells. In fact, they are the smallest of all human cells. They have a structure that suits them well to perform their function. 	coiled tube where sperm mature	5.e
The male reproductive organs include the penis, testes, epididymis, vas deferens, and prostate gland. These organs are shown in Figure 22.1. The figure also shows some other parts of the male reproductive system. Find each organ in the drawing as you read about it below. For a cartoon about the male reproductive system, watch this video: http MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  The penis is an external, cylinder-shaped organ that contains the urethra. The urethra is the tube that carries urine out of the body. It also carries sperm out of the body. The two testes (testis, singular) are oval organs that produce sperm and secrete testosterone. They are located inside a sac called the scrotum that hangs down outside the body. The scrotum also contains the epididymis. 	male organ that contains the urethra	6.a
Sperm are tiny cells. In fact, they are the smallest of all human cells. They have a structure that suits them well to perform their function. 	structure that secretes a fluid that helps form semen	7.c
It takes up to two months for mature sperm to form. The process occurs in several steps: 1. Special cells in the testes go through mitosis to make identical copies of themselves. 2. The copies of the original cells divide by meiosis. This results in haploid cells called spermatids. These cells lack tails and cannot yet swim. 3. Spermatids move from the testes to the epididymis, where they slowly mature. For example, they grow a tail and lose some of the cytoplasm from the head. 4. Once sperm are mature, they can swim. The mature sperm remain in the epididymis until it is time for them to leave the body. Sperm leave the epididymis through the vas deferens. As they travel through the vas deferens, they pass by the prostate and other glands. The sperm mix with secretions from these glands, forming semen. Semen travels through the urethra and leaves the body through the penis. A teaspoon of semen may contain as many as half a billion sperm! 	sperm mix with secretions as they pass through the vas deferens	true
Sperm are tiny cells. In fact, they are the smallest of all human cells. They have a structure that suits them well to perform their function. 	an adult male normally produces about 100 sperm each day	false
Sperm are tiny cells. In fact, they are the smallest of all human cells. They have a structure that suits them well to perform their function. 	testosterone is needed for the production of sperm	true
Sperm are tiny cells. In fact, they are the smallest of all human cells. They have a structure that suits them well to perform their function. 	sperm are the smallest of all human cells	true
Sperm are tiny cells. In fact, they are the smallest of all human cells. They have a structure that suits them well to perform their function. 	sperm swim at a speed of about 3 inches per hour	false
The male reproductive system has two main functions: producing sperm and releasing testosterone. Sperm are male gametes, or reproductive cells. Sperm form when certain cells in the male reproductive system divide by meiosis to form haploid cells. Being haploid means they have half the number of chromosomes of other cells in the body. An adult male may produce millions of sperm each day! Testosterone is the major sex hormone in males. Testosterone has two primary roles: 1. During adolescence, testosterone causes most of the changes associated with puberty. It causes the reproduc- tive organs to mature. It also causes other adult male traits to develop. For example, it causes the voice to deepen and facial hair to start growing. 2. During adulthood, testosterone is needed for the production of sperm. 	the reproductive system is the only human body system that differs significantly between males and	true
Sperm are tiny cells. In fact, they are the smallest of all human cells. They have a structure that suits them well to perform their function. 	both mitosis and meiosis are involved in the production of sperm	true
The male reproductive system has two main functions: producing sperm and releasing testosterone. Sperm are male gametes, or reproductive cells. Sperm form when certain cells in the male reproductive system divide by meiosis to form haploid cells. Being haploid means they have half the number of chromosomes of other cells in the body. An adult male may produce millions of sperm each day! Testosterone is the major sex hormone in males. Testosterone has two primary roles: 1. During adolescence, testosterone causes most of the changes associated with puberty. It causes the reproduc- tive organs to mature. It also causes other adult male traits to develop. For example, it causes the voice to deepen and facial hair to start growing. 2. During adulthood, testosterone is needed for the production of sperm. 	testosterone causes the voice to deepen when a male goes through puberty	true
The male reproductive organs include the penis, testes, epididymis, vas deferens, and prostate gland. These organs are shown in Figure 22.1. The figure also shows some other parts of the male reproductive system. Find each organ in the drawing as you read about it below. For a cartoon about the male reproductive system, watch this video: http MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  The penis is an external, cylinder-shaped organ that contains the urethra. The urethra is the tube that carries urine out of the body. It also carries sperm out of the body. The two testes (testis, singular) are oval organs that produce sperm and secrete testosterone. They are located inside a sac called the scrotum that hangs down outside the body. The scrotum also contains the epididymis. 	the only external male reproductive organ is the penis	false
The male reproductive organs include the penis, testes, epididymis, vas deferens, and prostate gland. These organs are shown in Figure 22.1. The figure also shows some other parts of the male reproductive system. Find each organ in the drawing as you read about it below. For a cartoon about the male reproductive system, watch this video: http MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  The penis is an external, cylinder-shaped organ that contains the urethra. The urethra is the tube that carries urine out of the body. It also carries sperm out of the body. The two testes (testis, singular) are oval organs that produce sperm and secrete testosterone. They are located inside a sac called the scrotum that hangs down outside the body. The scrotum also contains the epididymis. 	testosterone is a hormone secreted by the prostate gland	false
Sperm are tiny cells. In fact, they are the smallest of all human cells. They have a structure that suits them well to perform their function. 	sperm are stored in the vas deferens until they leave the body	false
Sperm are tiny cells. In fact, they are the smallest of all human cells. They have a structure that suits them well to perform their function. 	a teaspoon of semen may contain as many as half a billion sperm	true
Human eggs are very large cells. In fact, they are the largest of all human cells. You can even see an egg without a microscope. Its almost as big as the period at the end of this sentence. Like a sperm cell, an egg cell is a haploid cell with half the number of chromosomes of other cells in the body. Unlike a sperm cell, the egg lacks a tail and contains a lot of cytoplasm. 	structure where fertilization of an egg normally occurs	1.f
The female reproductive organs include the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, and vagina. These organs are shown in Figure 22.3, along with some other structures of the female reproductive system. Find each organ in the drawing as you read about it below. For a cartoon about the female reproductive system, watch this video: http://education-por The two ovaries are small, oval organs on either side of the abdomen. Each ovary contains thousands of eggs. However, the eggs do not develop fully until a female has gone through puberty. Then, about once a month, an egg is released by one of the ovaries. The ovaries also secrete estrogen. The two fallopian tubes are thin tubes that are connected to the uterus and extend almost to the ovaries. The upper end of each fallopian tube has fingers (called fimbriae) that sweep an egg into the fallopian tube when it is released by the ovary. The egg then passes through the fallopian tube to the uterus. If an egg is fertilized, this occurs in the fallopian tube. The uterus is a hollow organ with muscular walls. The uterus is where a baby develops until birth. The walls of the uterus stretch to accommodate the growing fetus. The muscles in the walls contract to push the baby out during birth. The uterus is connected to the vagina by a small opening called the cervix. The vagina is a cylinder-shaped organ that opens to the outside of the body. The other end joins with the uterus. Sperm deposited in the vagina swim up through the cervix, into the uterus, and from there into a 	cylindershaped organ through which a baby passes during birth	2.d
When a baby girl is born, her ovaries contain all of the eggs they will ever produce. But these eggs are not fully developed. They develop only after the female reaches puberty at about age 12 or 13. Then, just one egg develops each month until she reaches her 40s or early 50s. 	one of a pair of organs that produce and release eggs	3.g
The female reproductive organs include the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, and vagina. These organs are shown in Figure 22.3, along with some other structures of the female reproductive system. Find each organ in the drawing as you read about it below. For a cartoon about the female reproductive system, watch this video: http://education-por The two ovaries are small, oval organs on either side of the abdomen. Each ovary contains thousands of eggs. However, the eggs do not develop fully until a female has gone through puberty. Then, about once a month, an egg is released by one of the ovaries. The ovaries also secrete estrogen. The two fallopian tubes are thin tubes that are connected to the uterus and extend almost to the ovaries. The upper end of each fallopian tube has fingers (called fimbriae) that sweep an egg into the fallopian tube when it is released by the ovary. The egg then passes through the fallopian tube to the uterus. If an egg is fertilized, this occurs in the fallopian tube. The uterus is a hollow organ with muscular walls. The uterus is where a baby develops until birth. The walls of the uterus stretch to accommodate the growing fetus. The muscles in the walls contract to push the baby out during birth. The uterus is connected to the vagina by a small opening called the cervix. The vagina is a cylinder-shaped organ that opens to the outside of the body. The other end joins with the uterus. Sperm deposited in the vagina swim up through the cervix, into the uterus, and from there into a 	organ where a fetus develops and grows until birth	4.b
When a baby girl is born, her ovaries contain all of the eggs they will ever produce. But these eggs are not fully developed. They develop only after the female reaches puberty at about age 12 or 13. Then, just one egg develops each month until she reaches her 40s or early 50s. 	female gamete	5.e
Egg production in the ovary is part of the menstrual cycle. The menstrual cycle is a series of changes in the reproductive system of mature females that repeats every month on average. These changes include the development of an egg and follicle in the ovary. While the egg is developing, other changes are taking place in the uterus. It develops a thick lining that is full of tiny blood vessels. The lining prepares the uterus to receive a fertilized egg if fertilization actually takes place. If fertilization doesnt occur, the egg passes through the uterus and vagina and out of the body. The lining of the uterus also breaks down. Blood and other tissues from the lining pass through the vagina and leave the body. This is called menstruation. Menstruation is also called a menstrual period. It typically lasts about 4 days. When the menstrual period ends, the cycle begins repeats. 	small opening that connects the uterus to the vagina	6.c
Two functions of the female reproductive system are similar to the functions of the male reproductive system: producing gametes and secreting a major sex hormone. In the case of females, however, the gametes are eggs, and they are produced by the ovaries. The hormone is estrogen, which is the main sex hormone in females. Estrogen has two major roles: During adolescence, estrogen causes the changes of puberty. It causes the reproductive organs to mature. It also causes other female traits to develop. For example, it causes the breasts to grow and the hips to widen. During adulthood, estrogen is needed for a woman to release eggs from the ovaries. The female reproductive system has another important function, which is not found in males. It supports a baby as it develops before birth. It also gives birth to the baby at the end of pregnancy. 	main female sex hormone	7.a
Two functions of the female reproductive system are similar to the functions of the male reproductive system: producing gametes and secreting a major sex hormone. In the case of females, however, the gametes are eggs, and they are produced by the ovaries. The hormone is estrogen, which is the main sex hormone in females. Estrogen has two major roles: During adolescence, estrogen causes the changes of puberty. It causes the reproductive organs to mature. It also causes other female traits to develop. For example, it causes the breasts to grow and the hips to widen. During adulthood, estrogen is needed for a woman to release eggs from the ovaries. The female reproductive system has another important function, which is not found in males. It supports a baby as it develops before birth. It also gives birth to the baby at the end of pregnancy. 	estrogen causes the changes of puberty in females	true
When a baby girl is born, her ovaries contain all of the eggs they will ever produce. But these eggs are not fully developed. They develop only after the female reaches puberty at about age 12 or 13. Then, just one egg develops each month until she reaches her 40s or early 50s. 	following puberty an egg is released by each ovary about once a week	false
When a baby girl is born, her ovaries contain all of the eggs they will ever produce. But these eggs are not fully developed. They develop only after the female reaches puberty at about age 12 or 13. Then, just one egg develops each month until she reaches her 40s or early 50s. 	estrogen is secreted by female gonads	true
Human eggs are very large cells. In fact, they are the largest of all human cells. You can even see an egg without a microscope. Its almost as big as the period at the end of this sentence. Like a sperm cell, an egg cell is a haploid cell with half the number of chromosomes of other cells in the body. Unlike a sperm cell, the egg lacks a tail and contains a lot of cytoplasm. 	to fertilize an egg sperm must swim from the vagina to an ovary	false
Egg production in the ovary is part of the menstrual cycle. The menstrual cycle is a series of changes in the reproductive system of mature females that repeats every month on average. These changes include the development of an egg and follicle in the ovary. While the egg is developing, other changes are taking place in the uterus. It develops a thick lining that is full of tiny blood vessels. The lining prepares the uterus to receive a fertilized egg if fertilization actually takes place. If fertilization doesnt occur, the egg passes through the uterus and vagina and out of the body. The lining of the uterus also breaks down. Blood and other tissues from the lining pass through the vagina and leave the body. This is called menstruation. Menstruation is also called a menstrual period. It typically lasts about 4 days. When the menstrual period ends, the cycle begins repeats. 	the menstrual cycle is also called a menstrual period	false
Two functions of the female reproductive system are similar to the functions of the male reproductive system: producing gametes and secreting a major sex hormone. In the case of females, however, the gametes are eggs, and they are produced by the ovaries. The hormone is estrogen, which is the main sex hormone in females. Estrogen has two major roles: During adolescence, estrogen causes the changes of puberty. It causes the reproductive organs to mature. It also causes other female traits to develop. For example, it causes the breasts to grow and the hips to widen. During adulthood, estrogen is needed for a woman to release eggs from the ovaries. The female reproductive system has another important function, which is not found in males. It supports a baby as it develops before birth. It also gives birth to the baby at the end of pregnancy. 	the main female reproductive organs are inside the body	true
Two functions of the female reproductive system are similar to the functions of the male reproductive system: producing gametes and secreting a major sex hormone. In the case of females, however, the gametes are eggs, and they are produced by the ovaries. The hormone is estrogen, which is the main sex hormone in females. Estrogen has two major roles: During adolescence, estrogen causes the changes of puberty. It causes the reproductive organs to mature. It also causes other female traits to develop. For example, it causes the breasts to grow and the hips to widen. During adulthood, estrogen is needed for a woman to release eggs from the ovaries. The female reproductive system has another important function, which is not found in males. It supports a baby as it develops before birth. It also gives birth to the baby at the end of pregnancy. 	the male and female reproductive systems have identical functions	false
Two functions of the female reproductive system are similar to the functions of the male reproductive system: producing gametes and secreting a major sex hormone. In the case of females, however, the gametes are eggs, and they are produced by the ovaries. The hormone is estrogen, which is the main sex hormone in females. Estrogen has two major roles: During adolescence, estrogen causes the changes of puberty. It causes the reproductive organs to mature. It also causes other female traits to develop. For example, it causes the breasts to grow and the hips to widen. During adulthood, estrogen is needed for a woman to release eggs from the ovaries. The female reproductive system has another important function, which is not found in males. It supports a baby as it develops before birth. It also gives birth to the baby at the end of pregnancy. 	estrogen is needed for an adult woman to release eggs from the ovaries	true
When a baby girl is born, her ovaries contain all of the eggs they will ever produce. But these eggs are not fully developed. They develop only after the female reaches puberty at about age 12 or 13. Then, just one egg develops each month until she reaches her 40s or early 50s. 	the ovaries make eggs only after a female has gone through puberty	false
The female reproductive organs include the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, and vagina. These organs are shown in Figure 22.3, along with some other structures of the female reproductive system. Find each organ in the drawing as you read about it below. For a cartoon about the female reproductive system, watch this video: http://education-por The two ovaries are small, oval organs on either side of the abdomen. Each ovary contains thousands of eggs. However, the eggs do not develop fully until a female has gone through puberty. Then, about once a month, an egg is released by one of the ovaries. The ovaries also secrete estrogen. The two fallopian tubes are thin tubes that are connected to the uterus and extend almost to the ovaries. The upper end of each fallopian tube has fingers (called fimbriae) that sweep an egg into the fallopian tube when it is released by the ovary. The egg then passes through the fallopian tube to the uterus. If an egg is fertilized, this occurs in the fallopian tube. The uterus is a hollow organ with muscular walls. The uterus is where a baby develops until birth. The walls of the uterus stretch to accommodate the growing fetus. The muscles in the walls contract to push the baby out during birth. The uterus is connected to the vagina by a small opening called the cervix. The vagina is a cylinder-shaped organ that opens to the outside of the body. The other end joins with the uterus. Sperm deposited in the vagina swim up through the cervix, into the uterus, and from there into a 	the upper end of each fallopian tube is attached to an ovary	false
Egg production takes place in the ovaries. It occurs in several steps: 1. Before birth, special cells in the ovaries go through mitosis to make identical daughter cells. 2. The daughter cells then start to divide by meiosis. However, they go though only the first of the two cell divisions of meiosis at this time. They remain in that stage until the girl goes through puberty. 3. After puberty, an egg develops in an ovary about once a month. As you can see in Figure 22.4, the egg rests in a nest of cells called a follicle. The follicle and egg grow larger and go through other changes. 4. After a couple of weeks, the egg bursts out of the follicle and through the wall of the ovary. This is called ovulation. After ovulation occurs, the moving fingers of the nearby fallopian tube sweep the egg into the tube. Fertilization may occur if sperm reach the egg while it is passing through the fallopian tube. If this happens, the egg finally completes meiosis. This results in two daughter cells that differ in size. The smaller cell is called a polar body. It soon breaks down and disappears. The larger cell is the fertilized egg, which will develop into a new human being. 	an egg completes meiosis just before it leaves the ovary	false
Egg production in the ovary is part of the menstrual cycle. The menstrual cycle is a series of changes in the reproductive system of mature females that repeats every month on average. These changes include the development of an egg and follicle in the ovary. While the egg is developing, other changes are taking place in the uterus. It develops a thick lining that is full of tiny blood vessels. The lining prepares the uterus to receive a fertilized egg if fertilization actually takes place. If fertilization doesnt occur, the egg passes through the uterus and vagina and out of the body. The lining of the uterus also breaks down. Blood and other tissues from the lining pass through the vagina and leave the body. This is called menstruation. Menstruation is also called a menstrual period. It typically lasts about 4 days. When the menstrual period ends, the cycle begins repeats. 	while an egg is developing in a follicle the lining of the uterus breaks down and passes out of the	false
The first year of life after birth is called infancy. During infancy, a baby grows very quickly. The babys length typically doubles and her weight triples by her first birthday. Many other important changes also occur during infancy: The baby starts smiling, usually by about 6 weeks of age (see Figure 22.10). The baby starts noticing people and grabbing toys and other objects The baby teeth start to come in, usually by 6 months of age. The baby begins making babbling sounds. By the end of the first year, the baby may be saying a few words, such as Mama and Dada. The baby learns to sit, crawl, and stand. By the end of the first year, the baby may be starting to walk. 	a babys first teeth start coming in at about 12 months of age	false
Childhood begins after the babys first birthday and continues until puberty. Between 1 and 3 years of age, a child is called a toddler. During the toddler stage, growth is still very rapid, but not as rapid as it was during infancy. Toddlers learn many new words and starts putting them together in simple sentences. Motor skills also develop quickly during the toddler stage. By the age of 3 years, most children can run and climb steps. They can hold crayons and scribble with them. They can also feed themselves, and most can use the toilet. From age 3 until puberty, growth slows down. The body also changes shape. The arms and legs grow longer relative to the trunk. Children continue to develop new motor skills. For example, many young children learn how to ride a tricycle and then a bicycle. Most learn how to play games and sports. By the age of 6 years, children start losing their baby teeth. Permanent teeth come in to replace them. Most children have started school by this age. They typically start learning to read and write around age 6 or 7 (see Figure 22.11). During the later years of childhood, children also start to develop friendships and become less dependent on their parents. 	toddlers grow more rapidly than infants	false
For the first year after birth, a baby is referred to as an infant. Childhood begins at the age of two years and continues until puberty. Adolescence begins with puberty and lasts until adulthood. 	puberty occurs at the same age in all children	false
For the first year after birth, a baby is referred to as an infant. Childhood begins at the age of two years and continues until puberty. Adolescence begins with puberty and lasts until adulthood. 	a boys voice deepens at puberty as his larynx grows bigger	true
Middle adulthood is the period from the mid-30s to the mid-60s. During this stage of life, people start showing signs of aging. Their hair may thin and slowly turn gray. Their skin develops wrinkles. The risk of serious health problems increases. For example, cardiovascular diseases, cancer, and type 2 diabetes become more common in people of middle age. This is also the stage when many people raise a family and strive to attain career goals. 	people generally start showing signs of aging in middle adulthood	true
When a sperm penetrates the cell membrane of an egg, it triggers the egg to complete meiosis. The sperm also undergoes changes. Its tail falls off, and its nucleus fuses with the nucleus of the egg. The resulting cell, called a zygote, contains the diploid number of chromosomes. Half of the chromosomes come from the egg, and half come from the sperm. You can watch the process of fertilization and the development of a baby until birth in this amazing video:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	a zygote has the haploid number of chromosomes	false
Pregnancy is the carrying of one or more offspring from the time of implantation until birth. It is the development of an embryo and fetus from the expectant mothers point of view. 	as soon as a zygote starts to divide it is called an embryo	false
After implantation occurs, the blastocyst is called an embryo. The embryonic stage lasts from the end of the first week following fertilization through the end of the eighth week. During this time, the embryo grows in size and becomes more complex. It develops specialized cells and tissues. Most organs also start to form. You can see some of the specific changes that take place during weeks four to eight of the embryonic period in Figure 22.6. By the end of week eight, the embryo is about 30 millimeters (just over 1 inch) in length. It may also have begun to move. 	most organs start to form during the embryonic stage	true
After implantation occurs, the blastocyst is called an embryo. The embryonic stage lasts from the end of the first week following fertilization through the end of the eighth week. During this time, the embryo grows in size and becomes more complex. It develops specialized cells and tissues. Most organs also start to form. You can see some of the specific changes that take place during weeks four to eight of the embryonic period in Figure 22.6. By the end of week eight, the embryo is about 30 millimeters (just over 1 inch) in length. It may also have begun to move. 	the fetal period typically lasts about 30 weeks	true
Pregnancy is the carrying of one or more offspring from the time of implantation until birth. It is the development of an embryo and fetus from the expectant mothers point of view. 	the purpose of the placenta is to cushion the fetus and protect it from injury	false
Near the time of birth, the amniotic sac breaks in a gush of liquid. Labor usually begins within a day of this event. Labor involves contractions of the muscular walls of the uterus. With the mothers help, the contractions eventually push the fetus out of the uterus and through the vagina. Within seconds of birth, the umbilical cord is cut. Without this connection to the placenta, the baby cant exchange gases, so carbon dioxide quickly builds up in the babys blood. This stimulates the babys brain to trigger breathing, and the newborn takes her first breath. 	the umbilical cord is cut only after the baby starts to breathe on its own	false
The blastocyst continues down the fallopian tube until it reaches the uterus, about 4 or 5 days after fertilization. When the outer cells of the blastocyst contact cells lining the uterus (the endometrium in Figure 22.5), the blastocyst embeds itself in the uterine lining. This process is called implantation. It generally occurs about a week after fertilization. 	puberty generally occurs at an earlier age in girls than in boys	true
The blastocyst continues down the fallopian tube until it reaches the uterus, about 4 or 5 days after fertilization. When the outer cells of the blastocyst contact cells lining the uterus (the endometrium in Figure 22.5), the blastocyst embeds itself in the uterine lining. This process is called implantation. It generally occurs about a week after fertilization. 	process in which a blastocyst embeds in the uterine lining	1. f
Pregnancy is the carrying of one or more offspring from the time of implantation until birth. It is the development of an embryo and fetus from the expectant mothers point of view. 	fluidfilled membrane that surrounds and protects a fetus	2.c
The zygote spends the next few days traveling down the fallopian tube toward the uterus, where it will take up residence. As it travels, it divides many times by mitosis. It soon forms a tiny, fluid-filled ball of cells called a blastocyst. The blastocyst has an inner and outer layer of cells, as you can see in Figure 22.5. The inner layer, called the embryoblast, will develop into the new human being. The outer layer, called the trophoblast, will develop into other structures needed to support the new organism. 	fluidfilled ball of cells that forms soon after fertilization occurs	3.b
The zygote spends the next few days traveling down the fallopian tube toward the uterus, where it will take up residence. As it travels, it divides many times by mitosis. It soon forms a tiny, fluid-filled ball of cells called a blastocyst. The blastocyst has an inner and outer layer of cells, as you can see in Figure 22.5. The inner layer, called the embryoblast, will develop into the new human being. The outer layer, called the trophoblast, will develop into other structures needed to support the new organism. 	cell layer in the blastocyst that will develop into the placenta	4.e
Pregnancy is the carrying of one or more offspring from the time of implantation until birth. It is the development of an embryo and fetus from the expectant mothers point of view. 	tube containing blood vessels that connects a fetus to the placenta	5.g
When a sperm penetrates the cell membrane of an egg, it triggers the egg to complete meiosis. The sperm also undergoes changes. Its tail falls off, and its nucleus fuses with the nucleus of the egg. The resulting cell, called a zygote, contains the diploid number of chromosomes. Half of the chromosomes come from the egg, and half come from the sperm. You can watch the process of fertilization and the development of a baby until birth in this amazing video:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	cell that results when a sperm fertilizes an egg	6.d
Pregnancy is the carrying of one or more offspring from the time of implantation until birth. It is the development of an embryo and fetus from the expectant mothers point of view. 	temporary organ consisting of blood vessels from both the mother and fetus	7.a
Maintaining overall good health will help keep your reproductive system healthy. You should eat right, get regular exercise, and follow other healthy lifestyle behaviors. In addition, the following practices will help keep the reproductive system healthy: Keep the genitals clean. A daily shower or bath is all thats needed. Avoid harsh soaps or other personal hygiene products that may be irritating. Avoid risky behaviors. This includes contact with blood or dirty needles as well as sexual activity. If you are a girl and use tampons, be sure to change them every 4 to 6 hours. This will reduce your risk of toxic shock syndrome. This is a very dangerous condition that may occur if tampons are left in too long. If you are a boy, wear a protective cup if you play a contact sport. This will help protect the testes from injury. You should also learn how to check yourself for testicular cancer (see Figure 22.16). You can learn how by watching this video:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	serious condition that may occur if tampons are not changed often	1.f
A sexually transmitted infection (STI) is a disease that spreads mainly through sexual contact. STIs are caused by pathogens that enter the body through the reproductive organs. Many STIs also spread through body fluids such as blood. For example, a shared tattoo needle is one way that some STIs can spread. Some STIs can also spread from a mother to her infant during birth. 	any sexually transmitted infection	2.b
Several STIs are caused by viruses. Viral STIs cant be cured with antibiotics. Other drugs may help control the symptoms of viral STIs, but the infections usually last for life. Three viral STIs are genital warts, genital herpes, and AIDS. Genital herpes is a common STI caused by a herpes virus. The virus causes painful blisters on the penis or near the vaginal opening. The blisters generally go away on their own, but they may return repeatedly throughout life. There is no cure for genital herpes, but medicines can help prevent or shorten outbreaks. Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS) is caused by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). HIV destroys lymphocytes that normally fight infections. AIDS develops if the number of lymphocytes drops to a very low level. People with AIDS come down with diseasessuch as certain rare cancersthat almost never occur in people with a healthy immune system. Medicines can delay the progression of an HIV infection and may prevent AIDS from developing. Genital warts is an STI caused by human papilloma virus (HPV), which is pictured in Figure 22.15. This is one of the most common STIs in U.S. teens. Genital warts cant be cured, but a vaccine can prevent most HPV infections. The vaccine is recommended for boys and girls starting at 11 or 12 years of age. Its important to prevent HPV infections because they may lead to cancer later in life. 	virus that causes genital warts	3.d
Several STIs are caused by viruses. Viral STIs cant be cured with antibiotics. Other drugs may help control the symptoms of viral STIs, but the infections usually last for life. Three viral STIs are genital warts, genital herpes, and AIDS. Genital herpes is a common STI caused by a herpes virus. The virus causes painful blisters on the penis or near the vaginal opening. The blisters generally go away on their own, but they may return repeatedly throughout life. There is no cure for genital herpes, but medicines can help prevent or shorten outbreaks. Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS) is caused by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). HIV destroys lymphocytes that normally fight infections. AIDS develops if the number of lymphocytes drops to a very low level. People with AIDS come down with diseasessuch as certain rare cancersthat almost never occur in people with a healthy immune system. Medicines can delay the progression of an HIV infection and may prevent AIDS from developing. Genital warts is an STI caused by human papilloma virus (HPV), which is pictured in Figure 22.15. This is one of the most common STIs in U.S. teens. Genital warts cant be cured, but a vaccine can prevent most HPV infections. The vaccine is recommended for boys and girls starting at 11 or 12 years of age. Its important to prevent HPV infections because they may lead to cancer later in life. 	virus that may cause aids	4.g
Several STIs are caused by viruses. Viral STIs cant be cured with antibiotics. Other drugs may help control the symptoms of viral STIs, but the infections usually last for life. Three viral STIs are genital warts, genital herpes, and AIDS. Genital herpes is a common STI caused by a herpes virus. The virus causes painful blisters on the penis or near the vaginal opening. The blisters generally go away on their own, but they may return repeatedly throughout life. There is no cure for genital herpes, but medicines can help prevent or shorten outbreaks. Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS) is caused by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). HIV destroys lymphocytes that normally fight infections. AIDS develops if the number of lymphocytes drops to a very low level. People with AIDS come down with diseasessuch as certain rare cancersthat almost never occur in people with a healthy immune system. Medicines can delay the progression of an HIV infection and may prevent AIDS from developing. Genital warts is an STI caused by human papilloma virus (HPV), which is pictured in Figure 22.15. This is one of the most common STIs in U.S. teens. Genital warts cant be cured, but a vaccine can prevent most HPV infections. The vaccine is recommended for boys and girls starting at 11 or 12 years of age. Its important to prevent HPV infections because they may lead to cancer later in life. 	viral sti that can be prevented with a vaccine	5.c
A sexually transmitted infection (STI) is a disease that spreads mainly through sexual contact. STIs are caused by pathogens that enter the body through the reproductive organs. Many STIs also spread through body fluids such as blood. For example, a shared tattoo needle is one way that some STIs can spread. Some STIs can also spread from a mother to her infant during birth. 	disease that may develop in someone infected with hiv	6.e
A number of STIs are caused by bacteria. Bacterial STIs can usually be cured with antibiotics. However, some people with bacterial STIs may not have symptoms so they fail to get treatment. Left untreated, these infections may damage reproductive organs and lead to an inability to have children. Three bacterial STIs are chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis. Chlamydia is the most common bacterial STI in the U.S. Females are more likely to develop it than males. Symptoms may include burning during urination and a discharge from the vagina or penis. Gonorrhea is another common bacterial STI. Symptoms may include painful urination and a discharge from the vagina or penis. Syphilis is a very serious STI but somewhat less common than chlamydia or gonorrhea. It usually begins with a small sore on the genitals. This is followed a few months later by a rash and flu-like symptoms. If syphilis isnt treated, it can eventually damage the heart, brain, and other organs and even cause death. 	most common bacterial sti in the us	7.a
A sexually transmitted infection (STI) is a disease that spreads mainly through sexual contact. STIs are caused by pathogens that enter the body through the reproductive organs. Many STIs also spread through body fluids such as blood. For example, a shared tattoo needle is one way that some STIs can spread. Some STIs can also spread from a mother to her infant during birth. 	an sti is any medical problem that affects the reproductive organs	false
STIs are more common in teens and young adults than in older people. One reason is that young people are more likely to engage in risky behaviors. They also may not know how STIs spread. Instead, they may believe myths about STIs, like those in Table 22.1. Knowing the facts is important to prevent the spread of STIs. Myth If you are sexually active with just one person, then you cant get STIs. If you dont have any symptoms, then you dont have an STI. Getting STIs is no big deal, because they can be cured with medicines. Fact The only sure way to avoid getting STIs is to practice abstinence from sexual activity. Many STIs do not cause symptoms, especially in fe- males. Only some STIs can be cured with medicines; others cannot be cured. 	stis always cause symptoms	false
STIs are more common in teens and young adults than in older people. One reason is that young people are more likely to engage in risky behaviors. They also may not know how STIs spread. Instead, they may believe myths about STIs, like those in Table 22.1. Knowing the facts is important to prevent the spread of STIs. Myth If you are sexually active with just one person, then you cant get STIs. If you dont have any symptoms, then you dont have an STI. Getting STIs is no big deal, because they can be cured with medicines. Fact The only sure way to avoid getting STIs is to practice abstinence from sexual activity. Many STIs do not cause symptoms, especially in fe- males. Only some STIs can be cured with medicines; others cannot be cured. 	stis are most common in teens and young adults	true
Several STIs are caused by viruses. Viral STIs cant be cured with antibiotics. Other drugs may help control the symptoms of viral STIs, but the infections usually last for life. Three viral STIs are genital warts, genital herpes, and AIDS. Genital herpes is a common STI caused by a herpes virus. The virus causes painful blisters on the penis or near the vaginal opening. The blisters generally go away on their own, but they may return repeatedly throughout life. There is no cure for genital herpes, but medicines can help prevent or shorten outbreaks. Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS) is caused by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). HIV destroys lymphocytes that normally fight infections. AIDS develops if the number of lymphocytes drops to a very low level. People with AIDS come down with diseasessuch as certain rare cancersthat almost never occur in people with a healthy immune system. Medicines can delay the progression of an HIV infection and may prevent AIDS from developing. Genital warts is an STI caused by human papilloma virus (HPV), which is pictured in Figure 22.15. This is one of the most common STIs in U.S. teens. Genital warts cant be cured, but a vaccine can prevent most HPV infections. The vaccine is recommended for boys and girls starting at 11 or 12 years of age. Its important to prevent HPV infections because they may lead to cancer later in life. 	hiv destroys lymphocytes that normally fight infections	true
Disorders of the female reproductive system may involve the vagina, uterus, or ovaries. They may also affect the breasts. Vaginitis is a very common disorder. Symptoms include redness and itching of the vagina. It may be caused by soap or bubble bath. Another possible cause is a yeast infection. Yeast normally grow in the vagina. If they multiple too quickly, they may cause irritation. A yeast infection can be treated with medication. Cysts may develop in the ovaries. A cyst is a sac filled with fluid or other material. Ovarian cysts are usually harmless and often disappear on their own. However, some cysts may be painful and require surgery. Many females experience abdominal cramps during menstruation. This is usually normal and not a cause for concern. Exercise, heat, or medication may help relieve the pain. In severe cases, prescription medicine may be needed. Breast cancer is the most common type of cancer in females. It occurs when cells in the breast grow out of control and form a tumor. Breast cancer is rare in teens but becomes more common as females get older. Regular screening is recommended for most women starting around age 40. If found early, breast cancer usually can be cured with surgery. 	it is normal to have abdominal cramps during menstruation	true
A sexually transmitted infection (STI) is a disease that spreads mainly through sexual contact. STIs are caused by pathogens that enter the body through the reproductive organs. Many STIs also spread through body fluids such as blood. For example, a shared tattoo needle is one way that some STIs can spread. Some STIs can also spread from a mother to her infant during birth. 	many stis can spread through body fluids such as blood	true
A sexually transmitted infection (STI) is a disease that spreads mainly through sexual contact. STIs are caused by pathogens that enter the body through the reproductive organs. Many STIs also spread through body fluids such as blood. For example, a shared tattoo needle is one way that some STIs can spread. Some STIs can also spread from a mother to her infant during birth. 	a person with just one sexual partner cannot get stis by sexual contact	false
A number of STIs are caused by bacteria. Bacterial STIs can usually be cured with antibiotics. However, some people with bacterial STIs may not have symptoms so they fail to get treatment. Left untreated, these infections may damage reproductive organs and lead to an inability to have children. Three bacterial STIs are chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis. Chlamydia is the most common bacterial STI in the U.S. Females are more likely to develop it than males. Symptoms may include burning during urination and a discharge from the vagina or penis. Gonorrhea is another common bacterial STI. Symptoms may include painful urination and a discharge from the vagina or penis. Syphilis is a very serious STI but somewhat less common than chlamydia or gonorrhea. It usually begins with a small sore on the genitals. This is followed a few months later by a rash and flu-like symptoms. If syphilis isnt treated, it can eventually damage the heart, brain, and other organs and even cause death. 	untreated stis may lead to the inability to have children	true
A number of STIs are caused by bacteria. Bacterial STIs can usually be cured with antibiotics. However, some people with bacterial STIs may not have symptoms so they fail to get treatment. Left untreated, these infections may damage reproductive organs and lead to an inability to have children. Three bacterial STIs are chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis. Chlamydia is the most common bacterial STI in the U.S. Females are more likely to develop it than males. Symptoms may include burning during urination and a discharge from the vagina or penis. Gonorrhea is another common bacterial STI. Symptoms may include painful urination and a discharge from the vagina or penis. Syphilis is a very serious STI but somewhat less common than chlamydia or gonorrhea. It usually begins with a small sore on the genitals. This is followed a few months later by a rash and flu-like symptoms. If syphilis isnt treated, it can eventually damage the heart, brain, and other organs and even cause death. 	viral stis usually last for life	true
Several STIs are caused by viruses. Viral STIs cant be cured with antibiotics. Other drugs may help control the symptoms of viral STIs, but the infections usually last for life. Three viral STIs are genital warts, genital herpes, and AIDS. Genital herpes is a common STI caused by a herpes virus. The virus causes painful blisters on the penis or near the vaginal opening. The blisters generally go away on their own, but they may return repeatedly throughout life. There is no cure for genital herpes, but medicines can help prevent or shorten outbreaks. Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS) is caused by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). HIV destroys lymphocytes that normally fight infections. AIDS develops if the number of lymphocytes drops to a very low level. People with AIDS come down with diseasessuch as certain rare cancersthat almost never occur in people with a healthy immune system. Medicines can delay the progression of an HIV infection and may prevent AIDS from developing. Genital warts is an STI caused by human papilloma virus (HPV), which is pictured in Figure 22.15. This is one of the most common STIs in U.S. teens. Genital warts cant be cured, but a vaccine can prevent most HPV infections. The vaccine is recommended for boys and girls starting at 11 or 12 years of age. Its important to prevent HPV infections because they may lead to cancer later in life. 	aids is diagnosed in anyone who has an hiv infection	false
Other reproductive system disorders include injuries and noninfectious diseases. These are different in males and females. 	injuries to the testes are very rare	false
Disorders of the female reproductive system may involve the vagina, uterus, or ovaries. They may also affect the breasts. Vaginitis is a very common disorder. Symptoms include redness and itching of the vagina. It may be caused by soap or bubble bath. Another possible cause is a yeast infection. Yeast normally grow in the vagina. If they multiple too quickly, they may cause irritation. A yeast infection can be treated with medication. Cysts may develop in the ovaries. A cyst is a sac filled with fluid or other material. Ovarian cysts are usually harmless and often disappear on their own. However, some cysts may be painful and require surgery. Many females experience abdominal cramps during menstruation. This is usually normal and not a cause for concern. Exercise, heat, or medication may help relieve the pain. In severe cases, prescription medicine may be needed. Breast cancer is the most common type of cancer in females. It occurs when cells in the breast grow out of control and form a tumor. Breast cancer is rare in teens but becomes more common as females get older. Regular screening is recommended for most women starting around age 40. If found early, breast cancer usually can be cured with surgery. 	ovarian cysts are usually harmless	true
Organisms are individual living things. They range from microscopic bacteria to gigantic blue whales (see Figure must be obtained from the environment. Biotic factors are all of the living or once-living aspects of the environment. They include all the organisms that live there as well as the remains of dead organisms. Abiotic factors are all of the aspects of the environment that have never been alive. They include factors such as sunlight, minerals in soil, temperature, and moisture. 	all organisms have the same basic needs	true
Organisms are individual living things. They range from microscopic bacteria to gigantic blue whales (see Figure must be obtained from the environment. Biotic factors are all of the living or once-living aspects of the environment. They include all the organisms that live there as well as the remains of dead organisms. Abiotic factors are all of the aspects of the environment that have never been alive. They include factors such as sunlight, minerals in soil, temperature, and moisture. 	environmental factors can be classified as either biotic or abiotic	true
Organisms are individual living things. They range from microscopic bacteria to gigantic blue whales (see Figure must be obtained from the environment. Biotic factors are all of the living or once-living aspects of the environment. They include all the organisms that live there as well as the remains of dead organisms. Abiotic factors are all of the aspects of the environment that have never been alive. They include factors such as sunlight, minerals in soil, temperature, and moisture. 	an individual is a single living thing	true
Ecologists study organisms and environments at several different levels, from the individual to the biosphere. The levels are depicted in Figure 23.2 and described below. For a video introduction to the levels of organization in ecology, click on this link:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  An individual is an organism, or single living thing. A population is a group of individuals of the same species that live in the same area. Members of the same population generally interact with each other. A community is made up of all the populations of all the species that live in the same area. Populations in a community also generally interact with each other. 	members of the same population rarely interact with each other	false
Organisms are individual living things. They range from microscopic bacteria to gigantic blue whales (see Figure must be obtained from the environment. Biotic factors are all of the living or once-living aspects of the environment. They include all the organisms that live there as well as the remains of dead organisms. Abiotic factors are all of the aspects of the environment that have never been alive. They include factors such as sunlight, minerals in soil, temperature, and moisture. 	the biotic component of a biome is a community	false
Organisms are individual living things. They range from microscopic bacteria to gigantic blue whales (see Figure must be obtained from the environment. Biotic factors are all of the living or once-living aspects of the environment. They include all the organisms that live there as well as the remains of dead organisms. Abiotic factors are all of the aspects of the environment that have never been alive. They include factors such as sunlight, minerals in soil, temperature, and moisture. 	an ecosystem includes only biotic factors	false
Ecologists study organisms and environments at several different levels, from the individual to the biosphere. The levels are depicted in Figure 23.2 and described below. For a video introduction to the levels of organization in ecology, click on this link:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  An individual is an organism, or single living thing. A population is a group of individuals of the same species that live in the same area. Members of the same population generally interact with each other. A community is made up of all the populations of all the species that live in the same area. Populations in a community also generally interact with each other. 	the biosphere includes all the other levels of organization in ecology	true
Organisms are individual living things. They range from microscopic bacteria to gigantic blue whales (see Figure must be obtained from the environment. Biotic factors are all of the living or once-living aspects of the environment. They include all the organisms that live there as well as the remains of dead organisms. Abiotic factors are all of the aspects of the environment that have never been alive. They include factors such as sunlight, minerals in soil, temperature, and moisture. 	individual living thing	1.b
Organisms are individual living things. They range from microscopic bacteria to gigantic blue whales (see Figure must be obtained from the environment. Biotic factors are all of the living or once-living aspects of the environment. They include all the organisms that live there as well as the remains of dead organisms. Abiotic factors are all of the aspects of the environment that have never been alive. They include factors such as sunlight, minerals in soil, temperature, and moisture. 	any living or onceliving aspect of the environment	2.d
Organisms are individual living things. They range from microscopic bacteria to gigantic blue whales (see Figure must be obtained from the environment. Biotic factors are all of the living or once-living aspects of the environment. They include all the organisms that live there as well as the remains of dead organisms. Abiotic factors are all of the aspects of the environment that have never been alive. They include factors such as sunlight, minerals in soil, temperature, and moisture. 	group of similar ecosystems	3.f
Ecologists study organisms and environments at several different levels, from the individual to the biosphere. The levels are depicted in Figure 23.2 and described below. For a video introduction to the levels of organization in ecology, click on this link:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  An individual is an organism, or single living thing. A population is a group of individuals of the same species that live in the same area. Members of the same population generally interact with each other. A community is made up of all the populations of all the species that live in the same area. Populations in a community also generally interact with each other. 	group of individuals of the same species that live in the same area	4.g
Organisms are individual living things. They range from microscopic bacteria to gigantic blue whales (see Figure must be obtained from the environment. Biotic factors are all of the living or once-living aspects of the environment. They include all the organisms that live there as well as the remains of dead organisms. Abiotic factors are all of the aspects of the environment that have never been alive. They include factors such as sunlight, minerals in soil, temperature, and moisture. 	any aspect of the environment that has never been alive	5.a
Organisms are individual living things. They range from microscopic bacteria to gigantic blue whales (see Figure must be obtained from the environment. Biotic factors are all of the living or once-living aspects of the environment. They include all the organisms that live there as well as the remains of dead organisms. Abiotic factors are all of the aspects of the environment that have never been alive. They include factors such as sunlight, minerals in soil, temperature, and moisture. 	all the biotic and abiotic factors in an area and their interactions	6.e
Ecologists study organisms and environments at several different levels, from the individual to the biosphere. The levels are depicted in Figure 23.2 and described below. For a video introduction to the levels of organization in ecology, click on this link:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  An individual is an organism, or single living thing. A population is a group of individuals of the same species that live in the same area. Members of the same population generally interact with each other. A community is made up of all the populations of all the species that live in the same area. Populations in a community also generally interact with each other. 	all the populations of all the species that live in the same area	7.c
Another sign of a species state of health is the density of its populations. Population density is the average number of individuals in a population for a given area. Density is a measure of how crowded or spread out the individuals in a population are on average. For example, a population of 100 deer that live in an area of 10 square kilometers has a population density of 10 deer per square kilometer. Population density is an average measure. Often, individuals in a population are not spread out evenly. Instead, they may live in clumps or some other pattern. How individuals in a population are distributed, or spread throughout their area, is called population distribution. You can see different patterns of population distribution in Figure 23.3. Different patterns characterize different species and types of environments, as you can read in the figure. 	the most common pattern of population distribution is a random pattern	false
Population size is the number of individuals in a population. Population size influences the chances of a species surviving or going extinct. If a species populations become very small, the species may be at risk of going extinct. 	only births and deaths change the size of a population	false
Human beings have been called the most successful weed species on Earth. Like garden weeds, populations of human beings grow quickly and disperse rapidly. Human beings have colonized almost every terrestrial part of the planet. Overall, the human population has had a pattern of exponential growth, as you can see in Figure 23.6. The early human population grew very slowly. However, as the population grew larger, it started to grow more rapidly. 	a pattern of exponential population growth generally cannot continue for very long	true
Population size is the number of individuals in a population. Population size influences the chances of a species surviving or going extinct. If a species populations become very small, the species may be at risk of going extinct. 	the agesex structure of a population may influence the populations growth rate	true
Population size is the number of individuals in a population. Population size influences the chances of a species surviving or going extinct. If a species populations become very small, the species may be at risk of going extinct. 	the size and growth rate of its populations influences the chances of a species surviving	true
Population size is the number of individuals in a population. Population size influences the chances of a species surviving or going extinct. If a species populations become very small, the species may be at risk of going extinct. 	a random pattern of population distribution is typical of species in which individuals compete for	false
Population size is the number of individuals in a population. Population size influences the chances of a species surviving or going extinct. If a species populations become very small, the species may be at risk of going extinct. 	the human population started growing very rapidly about 10000 years ago	false
Population size is the number of individuals in a population. Population size influences the chances of a species surviving or going extinct. If a species populations become very small, the species may be at risk of going extinct. 	a population pyramid is a graphic representation of the agesex structure of a population	true
Just as they did in Europe and North America, death rates have fallen throughout the world. No country today remains in Stage 1 of the demographic transition. However, birth rates are still high in many of the poorest countries of the world. These populations seem to be stuck in Stage 2 or 3 of the demographic transition. They have high population growth rates because low death rates are not matched by equally low birth rates. Whether these populations will ever enter Stage 4 and attain very low rates of population growth is uncertain. 	many countries today remain in stage 1 of the demographic transition	false
Population size is the number of individuals in a population. Population size influences the chances of a species surviving or going extinct. If a species populations become very small, the species may be at risk of going extinct. 	the human population is predicted to exceed 9 billion by the year 2050	true
Human beings have been called the most successful weed species on Earth. Like garden weeds, populations of human beings grow quickly and disperse rapidly. Human beings have colonized almost every terrestrial part of the planet. Overall, the human population has had a pattern of exponential growth, as you can see in Figure 23.6. The early human population grew very slowly. However, as the population grew larger, it started to grow more rapidly. 	overall the human population has had a pattern of exponential growth	true
Just as they did in Europe and North America, death rates have fallen throughout the world. No country today remains in Stage 1 of the demographic transition. However, birth rates are still high in many of the poorest countries of the world. These populations seem to be stuck in Stage 2 or 3 of the demographic transition. They have high population growth rates because low death rates are not matched by equally low birth rates. Whether these populations will ever enter Stage 4 and attain very low rates of population growth is uncertain. 	major changes in human population growth rates first began in the 1700s	true
Population size is the number of individuals in a population. Population size influences the chances of a species surviving or going extinct. If a species populations become very small, the species may be at risk of going extinct. 	way in which individuals in a population are spread over their area	1.f
Human beings have been called the most successful weed species on Earth. Like garden weeds, populations of human beings grow quickly and disperse rapidly. Human beings have colonized almost every terrestrial part of the planet. Overall, the human population has had a pattern of exponential growth, as you can see in Figure 23.6. The early human population grew very slowly. However, as the population grew larger, it started to grow more rapidly. 	pattern of population growth in which the rate of growth keeps increasing as the population gets	2.d
Population size is the number of individuals in a population. Population size influences the chances of a species surviving or going extinct. If a species populations become very small, the species may be at risk of going extinct. 	how quickly population size changes over time	3.e
Population size is the number of individuals in a population. Population size influences the chances of a species surviving or going extinct. If a species populations become very small, the species may be at risk of going extinct. 	largest population size that can be supported in an area without harming the environment	4.a
Population size is the number of individuals in a population. Population size influences the chances of a species surviving or going extinct. If a species populations become very small, the species may be at risk of going extinct. 	average number of individuals in a population for a given area	5.c
Population size is the number of individuals in a population. Population size influences the chances of a species surviving or going extinct. If a species populations become very small, the species may be at risk of going extinct. 	numbers of individuals of each age and sex in a population	6.b
Human beings have been called the most successful weed species on Earth. Like garden weeds, populations of human beings grow quickly and disperse rapidly. Human beings have colonized almost every terrestrial part of the planet. Overall, the human population has had a pattern of exponential growth, as you can see in Figure 23.6. The early human population grew very slowly. However, as the population grew larger, it started to grow more rapidly. 	pattern of population growth in which the rate of growth slows as the population nears the carrying	7.g
Plants are the primary producers in terrestrial biomes. They make food for themselves and other organisms by photosynthesis. The major plants in a given biome, in turn, help determine the types of animals and other organisms that can live there. Which plants grow in a given biome depends mainly on climate. Climate is the average weather in a place over a long period of time. The major climatic factors affecting plant growth are temperature and moisture. 	all ecosystems at the same latitude are placed in the same biome	false
Plants are the primary producers in terrestrial biomes. They make food for themselves and other organisms by photosynthesis. The major plants in a given biome, in turn, help determine the types of animals and other organisms that can live there. Which plants grow in a given biome depends mainly on climate. Climate is the average weather in a place over a long period of time. The major climatic factors affecting plant growth are temperature and moisture. 	ecosystems in the same biome have the same type of primary producers	true
Plants are the primary producers in terrestrial biomes. They make food for themselves and other organisms by photosynthesis. The major plants in a given biome, in turn, help determine the types of animals and other organisms that can live there. Which plants grow in a given biome depends mainly on climate. Climate is the average weather in a place over a long period of time. The major climatic factors affecting plant growth are temperature and moisture. 	plants are the primary producers in all of earths biomes	false
Plants are the primary producers in terrestrial biomes. They make food for themselves and other organisms by photosynthesis. The major plants in a given biome, in turn, help determine the types of animals and other organisms that can live there. Which plants grow in a given biome depends mainly on climate. Climate is the average weather in a place over a long period of time. The major climatic factors affecting plant growth are temperature and moisture. 	which plants grow in a particular biome depends mainly on climate	true
Terrestrial biomes are land-based biomes. They range from arctic tundra to tropical rainforests. Figure 23.18 shows the locations of the worlds major terrestrial biomes. 	arctic tundra is found only at low latitudes	false
Aquatic biomes are water-based biomes. They include both freshwater biomes, such as rivers and lakes, and marine biomes, which are salt-water biomes in the ocean. The primary producers in most aquatic biomes are phytoplankton. Phytoplankton consist of microscopic bacteria and tiny algae that make food by photosynthesis. Unlike terrestrial biomes, which are determined mainly by temperature and moisture, aquatic biomes are determined mainly by sunlight and dissolved substances in the water. These factors, in turn, depend mainly on depth of water and distance from shore. 	rivers and lakes are examples of marine biomes	false
In addition to sunlight, aquatic producers also need dissolved oxygen and nutrients. Water near the surface generally contains more dissolved oxygen than deeper water. Many nutrients enter the water from the land. Therefore, water nearer shore usually contains more dissolved nutrients than water farther from shore. 	deep water generally contains more dissolved oxygen than water near the surface	false
Aquatic biomes are water-based biomes. They include both freshwater biomes, such as rivers and lakes, and marine biomes, which are salt-water biomes in the ocean. The primary producers in most aquatic biomes are phytoplankton. Phytoplankton consist of microscopic bacteria and tiny algae that make food by photosynthesis. Unlike terrestrial biomes, which are determined mainly by temperature and moisture, aquatic biomes are determined mainly by sunlight and dissolved substances in the water. These factors, in turn, depend mainly on depth of water and distance from shore. 	primary producers in most aquatic biomes	1.e
In addition to sunlight, aquatic producers also need dissolved oxygen and nutrients. Water near the surface generally contains more dissolved oxygen than deeper water. Many nutrients enter the water from the land. Therefore, water nearer shore usually contains more dissolved nutrients than water farther from shore. 	shallow water near the shore of a lake	2.d
Only the top 200 meters or so of water receive enough sunlight for photosynthesis. This part of the water is called the photic zone. Below 200 meters, there is too little sunlight for photosynthesis to take place. This part of the water is called the aphotic zone. In this zone, food must come from other sources. It may be made by chemosynthesis, in which microorganisms use energy in chemicals instead of sunlight to make food. Or, food may drift down from the water above. 	part of a body of water that is too deep for sunlight to reach	3.g
Terrestrial biomes are land-based biomes. They range from arctic tundra to tropical rainforests. Figure 23.18 shows the locations of the worlds major terrestrial biomes. 	general term for a group of similar ecosystems	4.b
A lake is an example of a freshwater biome. Water in a lake generally forms three different zones based on water depth and distance from shore. The shallow water near the shore is called the littoral zone. It has diverse community of organisms. There is adequate light for photosynthesis and plenty of dissolved oxygen and nutrients. Producers include algae and aquatic plants (see Figure 23.20). Animals in this zone may include insects, crustaceans, fish, and turtles. The top layer of water farther from shore is called the limnetic zone. There is enough light for photosynthesis and plenty of dissolved oxygen. However, dissolved nutrients tend not to be as plentiful as they are in the littoral zone. Producers here are mainly phytoplankton. A variety of zooplankton and fish also occupy this zone. The deeper water of a lake makes up the profundal zone. There isnt enough light for photosynthesis in this zone, so most organisms here eat dead organisms that drift down from the water above. Organisms in the profundal zone may include clams, snails, and some species of fish. 	the littoral zone of a lake is the deep water near the bottom	false
In addition to sunlight, aquatic producers also need dissolved oxygen and nutrients. Water near the surface generally contains more dissolved oxygen than deeper water. Many nutrients enter the water from the land. Therefore, water nearer shore usually contains more dissolved nutrients than water farther from shore. 	in aquatic biomes water closer to shore usually contains more dissolved nutrients than water farther	true
Only the top 200 meters or so of water receive enough sunlight for photosynthesis. This part of the water is called the photic zone. Below 200 meters, there is too little sunlight for photosynthesis to take place. This part of the water is called the aphotic zone. In this zone, food must come from other sources. It may be made by chemosynthesis, in which microorganisms use energy in chemicals instead of sunlight to make food. Or, food may drift down from the water above. 	top 200 meters of a body of water	5.a
Zones in the oceans include the intertidal, pelagic, and benthic zones. The types of organisms found in these ocean zones are also determined by such factors as depth of water and distance from shore, among other factors. One of the most familiar ocean zones is the intertidal zone. This is the narrow strip along a coastline that is covered by water at high tide and exposed to air at low tide. You can see an example of an intertidal zone in Figure 23.21. There are plenty of nutrients and sunlight in the intertidal zone. Producers here include phytoplankton and algae. Other organisms include barnacles, snails, crabs, and mussels. They must have adaptations for the constantly changing conditions in this zone. Other ocean zones are farther from shore in the open ocean. All the water in the open ocean is called the pelagic zone. It is further divided by depth: The top 200 meters of water is the photic zone. Producers here include seaweeds and phytoplankton. Other organisms are plentiful. They include zooplankton and animals such as fish, whales, and dolphins. 	all the water in the open ocean far from shore is called the pelagic zone	true
Plants are the primary producers in terrestrial biomes. They make food for themselves and other organisms by photosynthesis. The major plants in a given biome, in turn, help determine the types of animals and other organisms that can live there. Which plants grow in a given biome depends mainly on climate. Climate is the average weather in a place over a long period of time. The major climatic factors affecting plant growth are temperature and moisture. 	average weather in a place over a long period of time	6.c
Aquatic biomes are water-based biomes. They include both freshwater biomes, such as rivers and lakes, and marine biomes, which are salt-water biomes in the ocean. The primary producers in most aquatic biomes are phytoplankton. Phytoplankton consist of microscopic bacteria and tiny algae that make food by photosynthesis. Unlike terrestrial biomes, which are determined mainly by temperature and moisture, aquatic biomes are determined mainly by sunlight and dissolved substances in the water. These factors, in turn, depend mainly on depth of water and distance from shore. 	of or relating to the ocean	7.f
Only the top 200 meters or so of water receive enough sunlight for photosynthesis. This part of the water is called the photic zone. Below 200 meters, there is too little sunlight for photosynthesis to take place. This part of the water is called the aphotic zone. In this zone, food must come from other sources. It may be made by chemosynthesis, in which microorganisms use energy in chemicals instead of sunlight to make food. Or, food may drift down from the water above. 	there is not enough sunlight for photosynthesis in the aphotic zone of a body of water	true
Zones in the oceans include the intertidal, pelagic, and benthic zones. The types of organisms found in these ocean zones are also determined by such factors as depth of water and distance from shore, among other factors. One of the most familiar ocean zones is the intertidal zone. This is the narrow strip along a coastline that is covered by water at high tide and exposed to air at low tide. You can see an example of an intertidal zone in Figure 23.21. There are plenty of nutrients and sunlight in the intertidal zone. Producers here include phytoplankton and algae. Other organisms include barnacles, snails, crabs, and mussels. They must have adaptations for the constantly changing conditions in this zone. Other ocean zones are farther from shore in the open ocean. All the water in the open ocean is called the pelagic zone. It is further divided by depth: The top 200 meters of water is the photic zone. Producers here include seaweeds and phytoplankton. Other organisms are plentiful. They include zooplankton and animals such as fish, whales, and dolphins. 	the benthic zone of the ocean includes the sediments at the bottom of the water	true
Major exchange pools of carbon include organisms and the atmosphere. Carbon cycles more quickly between these components of the carbon cycle. Photosynthesis by plants and other producers removes carbon dioxide from the atmosphere to make organic compounds for living things. Cellular respiration by living things releases carbon into the atmosphere or ocean as carbon dioxide. Decomposition of dead organisms and organic wastes releases carbon back to the atmosphere, soil, or ocean. 	the ocean is a reservoir in the carbon cycle	true
Water is an extremely important aspect of every ecosystem. Life cant exist without water. Most organisms contain a large amount of water, and many live in water. Therefore, the water cycle is essential to life on Earth. Water on Earth is billions of years old. However, individual water molecules keep moving through the water cycle. The water cycle is a global cycle. It takes place on, above, and below Earths surface, as shown in Figure 24.7. During the water cycle, water occurs in three different states: gas (water vapor), liquid (water), and solid (ice). Many processes are involved as water changes state to move through the cycle. Watch this video for an excellent visual introduction to the water cycle:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	life on earth could not exist without water	true
Water is an extremely important aspect of every ecosystem. Life cant exist without water. Most organisms contain a large amount of water, and many live in water. Therefore, the water cycle is essential to life on Earth. Water on Earth is billions of years old. However, individual water molecules keep moving through the water cycle. The water cycle is a global cycle. It takes place on, above, and below Earths surface, as shown in Figure 24.7. During the water cycle, water occurs in three different states: gas (water vapor), liquid (water), and solid (ice). Many processes are involved as water changes state to move through the cycle. Watch this video for an excellent visual introduction to the water cycle:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	individual water molecules may be billions of years old	true
Rising air currents carry water vapor into the atmosphere. As the water vapor rises in the atmosphere, it cools and condenses. Condensation is the process in which water vapor changes to tiny droplets of liquid water. The water droplets may form clouds. If the droplets get big enough, they fall as precipitation. Precipitation is any form of water that falls from the atmosphere. It includes rain, snow, sleet, hail, and freezing rain. Most precipitation falls into the ocean. Eventually, this water evaporates again and repeats the water cycle. Some frozen precipitation becomes part of ice caps and glaciers. These masses of ice can store frozen water for hundreds of years or even longer. Condensation may also form fog or dew. Some living things, like the lizard in Figure 24.8, depend directly on these sources of liquid water. 	water changes to a gas by the process of condensation	false
Rising air currents carry water vapor into the atmosphere. As the water vapor rises in the atmosphere, it cools and condenses. Condensation is the process in which water vapor changes to tiny droplets of liquid water. The water droplets may form clouds. If the droplets get big enough, they fall as precipitation. Precipitation is any form of water that falls from the atmosphere. It includes rain, snow, sleet, hail, and freezing rain. Most precipitation falls into the ocean. Eventually, this water evaporates again and repeats the water cycle. Some frozen precipitation becomes part of ice caps and glaciers. These masses of ice can store frozen water for hundreds of years or even longer. Condensation may also form fog or dew. Some living things, like the lizard in Figure 24.8, depend directly on these sources of liquid water. 	water in clouds is in the gaseous state	false
Precipitation that falls on land may flow over the surface of the ground. This water is called runoff. It may eventually flow into a body of water. Some precipitation that falls on land soaks into the ground. This water becomes groundwater. Groundwater may seep out of the ground at a spring or into a body of water such as the ocean. Some groundwater is taken up by plant roots. Some may flow deeper underground to an aquifer. An aquifer is an underground layer of rock that stores water. Water may be stored in an aquifer for thousands of years. 	most precipitation falls on land	false
Major reservoirs of carbon include sedimentary rocks, fossil fuels, and the ocean. Sediments from dead organisms may form carbon-containing sedimentary rocks. Alternatively, the sediments may form carbon-rich fossil fuels, which include oil, natural gas, and coal. Carbon can be stored in these reservoirs for millions of years. However, if fossil fuels are extracted and burned, the stored carbon enters the atmosphere as carbon dioxide. Natural processes, such as volcanic eruptions, can also release underground carbon from rocks into the atmosphere. Water erosion by runoff, rivers, and streams dissolves carbon in rocks and carries it to the ocean. Ocean water near the surface dissolves carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Dissolved carbon may be stored in the deep ocean for thousands of years. 	volcanic eruptions can release underground carbon from rocks into the atmosphere	true
Nitrogen is another common element found in living things. It is needed to form both proteins and nucleic acids such as DNA. Nitrogen gas makes up 78 percent of Earths atmosphere. In the nitrogen cycle, nitrogen flows back and forth between the atmosphere and living things. You can see how it happens in Figure 24.10. Several different types of bacteria play major roles in the cycle. Animals get nitrogen by eating plants or other organisms that eat plants. Where do plants get nitrogen? They cant use nitrogen gas in the air. The only form of nitrogen that plants can use is in chemical compounds called nitrates. Plants absorb nitrates through their roots. This is called assimilation. Most of the nitrates are produced by bacteria that live in soil or in the roots of plants called legumes. Nitrogen-fixing bacteria change nitrogen gas from the atmosphere to nitrates in soil. When organisms die and decompose, their nitrogen is returned to the soil as ammonium ions. Nitrifying bacteria change some of the ammonium ions into nitrates. The other ammonium ions are changed into nitrogen gas by denitrifying bacteria. 	the only form of nitrogen that plants can use is nitrogen gas	false
Nitrogen is another common element found in living things. It is needed to form both proteins and nucleic acids such as DNA. Nitrogen gas makes up 78 percent of Earths atmosphere. In the nitrogen cycle, nitrogen flows back and forth between the atmosphere and living things. You can see how it happens in Figure 24.10. Several different types of bacteria play major roles in the cycle. Animals get nitrogen by eating plants or other organisms that eat plants. Where do plants get nitrogen? They cant use nitrogen gas in the air. The only form of nitrogen that plants can use is in chemical compounds called nitrates. Plants absorb nitrates through their roots. This is called assimilation. Most of the nitrates are produced by bacteria that live in soil or in the roots of plants called legumes. Nitrogen-fixing bacteria change nitrogen gas from the atmosphere to nitrates in soil. When organisms die and decompose, their nitrogen is returned to the soil as ammonium ions. Nitrifying bacteria change some of the ammonium ions into nitrates. The other ammonium ions are changed into nitrogen gas by denitrifying bacteria. 	nitrogenfixing bacteria change ammonium ions into nitrogen gas	false
Major exchange pools of carbon include organisms and the atmosphere. Carbon cycles more quickly between these components of the carbon cycle. Photosynthesis by plants and other producers removes carbon dioxide from the atmosphere to make organic compounds for living things. Cellular respiration by living things releases carbon into the atmosphere or ocean as carbon dioxide. Decomposition of dead organisms and organic wastes releases carbon back to the atmosphere, soil, or ocean. 	the atmosphere is an exchange pool for water	true
The element carbon is the basis of all life on Earth. Biochemical compounds consist of chains of carbon atoms and just a few other elements. Like water, carbon is constantly recycled through the biotic and abiotic factors of ecosystems. The carbon cycle includes carbon in sedimentary rocks and fossil fuels under the ground, the ocean, the atmosphere, and living things. The diagram in Figure 24.9 represents the carbon cycle. It shows some of the ways that carbon moves between the different parts of the cycle. You can see an animated carbon cycle at this link: http://commons.w 	water keeps changing state as it moves through the water cycle	true
Water changes to a gas by three different processes called evaporation, sublimation, and transpiration. Evaporation takes place when water on Earths surface changes to water vapor. The sun heats the water and gives water molecules enough energy to escape into the atmosphere. Most evaporation occurs from the surface of the ocean. Sublimation takes place when snow and ice on Earths surface change directly to water vapor without first melting to form liquid water. This also happens because of heat from the sun. Transpiration takes place when plants release water vapor through pores in their leaves called stomata. 	plants release water vapor to the atmosphere through their leaves	true
Water changes to a gas by three different processes called evaporation, sublimation, and transpiration. Evaporation takes place when water on Earths surface changes to water vapor. The sun heats the water and gives water molecules enough energy to escape into the atmosphere. Most evaporation occurs from the surface of the ocean. Sublimation takes place when snow and ice on Earths surface change directly to water vapor without first melting to form liquid water. This also happens because of heat from the sun. Transpiration takes place when plants release water vapor through pores in their leaves called stomata. 	process in which water vapor changes to liquid water	1.f
The chemical elements and water that are needed by living things keep recycling on Earth. They pass back and forth through biotic and abiotic components of ecosystems. Thats why their cycles are called biogeochemical cycles. For example, a chemical element or water might move from organisms (bio) to the atmosphere or ocean (geo) and back to organisms again. Elements or water may be held for various periods of time in different parts of a biogeochemical cycle. An exchange pool is part of a cycle that holds a substance for a short period of time. For example, the atmosphere is an exchange pool for water. It usually holds water (as water vapor) for just a few days. A reservoir is part of a cycle that holds a substance for a long period of time. For example, the ocean is a reservoir for water. It may hold water for thousands of years. The rest of this lesson describes three biogeochemical cycles: water cycle, carbon cycle, and nitrogen cycle. 	part of a biogeochemical cycle that holds a substance for a long period of time	2.a
Precipitation that falls on land may flow over the surface of the ground. This water is called runoff. It may eventually flow into a body of water. Some precipitation that falls on land soaks into the ground. This water becomes groundwater. Groundwater may seep out of the ground at a spring or into a body of water such as the ocean. Some groundwater is taken up by plant roots. Some may flow deeper underground to an aquifer. An aquifer is an underground layer of rock that stores water. Water may be stored in an aquifer for thousands of years. 	water that falls as precipitation and then flows over the surface of the land	3.d
The element carbon is the basis of all life on Earth. Biochemical compounds consist of chains of carbon atoms and just a few other elements. Like water, carbon is constantly recycled through the biotic and abiotic factors of ecosystems. The carbon cycle includes carbon in sedimentary rocks and fossil fuels under the ground, the ocean, the atmosphere, and living things. The diagram in Figure 24.9 represents the carbon cycle. It shows some of the ways that carbon moves between the different parts of the cycle. You can see an animated carbon cycle at this link: http://commons.w 	biogeochemical cycle that includes sedimentary rocks and fossil fuels	4.c
The chemical elements and water that are needed by living things keep recycling on Earth. They pass back and forth through biotic and abiotic components of ecosystems. Thats why their cycles are called biogeochemical cycles. For example, a chemical element or water might move from organisms (bio) to the atmosphere or ocean (geo) and back to organisms again. Elements or water may be held for various periods of time in different parts of a biogeochemical cycle. An exchange pool is part of a cycle that holds a substance for a short period of time. For example, the atmosphere is an exchange pool for water. It usually holds water (as water vapor) for just a few days. A reservoir is part of a cycle that holds a substance for a long period of time. For example, the ocean is a reservoir for water. It may hold water for thousands of years. The rest of this lesson describes three biogeochemical cycles: water cycle, carbon cycle, and nitrogen cycle. 	part of a biogeochemical cycle that holds a substance for a short period of time	5.e
Nitrogen is another common element found in living things. It is needed to form both proteins and nucleic acids such as DNA. Nitrogen gas makes up 78 percent of Earths atmosphere. In the nitrogen cycle, nitrogen flows back and forth between the atmosphere and living things. You can see how it happens in Figure 24.10. Several different types of bacteria play major roles in the cycle. Animals get nitrogen by eating plants or other organisms that eat plants. Where do plants get nitrogen? They cant use nitrogen gas in the air. The only form of nitrogen that plants can use is in chemical compounds called nitrates. Plants absorb nitrates through their roots. This is called assimilation. Most of the nitrates are produced by bacteria that live in soil or in the roots of plants called legumes. Nitrogen-fixing bacteria change nitrogen gas from the atmosphere to nitrates in soil. When organisms die and decompose, their nitrogen is returned to the soil as ammonium ions. Nitrifying bacteria change some of the ammonium ions into nitrates. The other ammonium ions are changed into nitrogen gas by denitrifying bacteria. 	biogeochemical cycle that includes the atmosphere and several types of bacteria	6.g
Water changes to a gas by three different processes called evaporation, sublimation, and transpiration. Evaporation takes place when water on Earths surface changes to water vapor. The sun heats the water and gives water molecules enough energy to escape into the atmosphere. Most evaporation occurs from the surface of the ocean. Sublimation takes place when snow and ice on Earths surface change directly to water vapor without first melting to form liquid water. This also happens because of heat from the sun. Transpiration takes place when plants release water vapor through pores in their leaves called stomata. 	process in which snow and ice change directly to water vapor	7.b
Another major problem caused by air pollution is global climate change. Gases such as carbon dioxide from the burning of fossil fuels increase the greenhouse effect and raise Earths temperature. The greenhouse effect is a natural feature of Earths atmosphere. It occurs when certain gases in the atmosphere, including carbon dioxide, radiate the suns heat back down to Earths surface. Figure 25.2 shows how this happens. Without greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, the heat would escape into space. The natural greenhouse effect of Earths atmosphere keeps the planets temperature within a range that can support life. The rise in greenhouse gases due to human actions is too much of a good thing. It increases the greenhouse effect and causes Earths average temperature to rise. Rising global temperatures, in turn, are melting polar ice caps and glaciers. Figure 25.3 shows how much smaller the Arctic ice cap was in 2012 than it was in 1984. With more liquid water on Earths surface, sea levels are rising. Adding more heat energy to Earths atmosphere also causes more extreme weather and changes in precipitation patterns. Global warming is already causing food and water shortages and species extinctions. These problems will only grow worse unless steps are taken to curb greenhouse gases and global climate change. 	main gas that is causing global climate change	1.g
You may be able to avoid some of the health effects of outdoor air pollution by staying indoors on high-pollution days. However, some indoor air is just as polluted as outdoor air. 	naturally occurring radioactive gas that may pollute indoor air	2.f
Air pollution may also cause acid rain. This is rain that is more acidic (has a lower pH) than normal rain. Acids form in the atmosphere when nitrogen and sulfur oxides mix with water in air. Nitrogen and sulfur oxides come mainly from motor vehicle exhaust and coal burning. If acid rain falls into lakes, it lowers the pH of the water and may kill aquatic organisms. If it falls on the ground, it may damage soil and soil organisms. If it falls on plants, it may make them sick or even kill them. Acid rain also damages stone buildings, bridges, and statues, like the one in Figure 25.1. 	air pollutant produced by burning coal that causes acid rain	3.d
Outdoor air pollution causes serious human health problems. For example, pollutants in the air are major contributors to respiratory and cardiovascular diseases. Air pollution may trigger asthma attacks and heart attacks in people with underlying health problems. In fact, more people die each year from air pollution than automobile accidents. 	air pollutant caused by motor vehicle exhaust that worsens respiratory problems	4.b
One source of indoor air pollution is radon gas. Radon is a radioactive gas that may seep into buildings from rocks underground. Exposure to radon gas may cause lung cancer. Another potential poison in indoor air is carbon monoxide. It may be released by faulty or poorly vented furnaces or other fuel-burning appliances. Indoor furniture, carpets, and paints may release toxic compounds into the air as well. Other possible sources of indoor air pollution include dust, mold, and pet dander. 	toxic gas that may be released by faulty fuelburning appliances	5. c
One source of indoor air pollution is radon gas. Radon is a radioactive gas that may seep into buildings from rocks underground. Exposure to radon gas may cause lung cancer. Another potential poison in indoor air is carbon monoxide. It may be released by faulty or poorly vented furnaces or other fuel-burning appliances. Indoor furniture, carpets, and paints may release toxic compounds into the air as well. Other possible sources of indoor air pollution include dust, mold, and pet dander. 	any harmful substance released into the atmosphere	6. a
Another major problem caused by air pollution is global climate change. Gases such as carbon dioxide from the burning of fossil fuels increase the greenhouse effect and raise Earths temperature. The greenhouse effect is a natural feature of Earths atmosphere. It occurs when certain gases in the atmosphere, including carbon dioxide, radiate the suns heat back down to Earths surface. Figure 25.2 shows how this happens. Without greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, the heat would escape into space. The natural greenhouse effect of Earths atmosphere keeps the planets temperature within a range that can support life. The rise in greenhouse gases due to human actions is too much of a good thing. It increases the greenhouse effect and causes Earths average temperature to rise. Rising global temperatures, in turn, are melting polar ice caps and glaciers. Figure 25.3 shows how much smaller the Arctic ice cap was in 2012 than it was in 1984. With more liquid water on Earths surface, sea levels are rising. Adding more heat energy to Earths atmosphere also causes more extreme weather and changes in precipitation patterns. Global warming is already causing food and water shortages and species extinctions. These problems will only grow worse unless steps are taken to curb greenhouse gases and global climate change. 	natural feature of earths atmosphere that warms earths surface	7. e
You may be able to avoid some of the health effects of outdoor air pollution by staying indoors on high-pollution days. However, some indoor air is just as polluted as outdoor air. 	earths atmosphere is too vast to become seriously polluted	false
Outdoor air pollution causes serious human health problems. For example, pollutants in the air are major contributors to respiratory and cardiovascular diseases. Air pollution may trigger asthma attacks and heart attacks in people with underlying health problems. In fact, more people die each year from air pollution than automobile accidents. 	cardiovascular diseases may be worsened by air pollution	true
The major cause of outdoor air pollution is the burning of fossil fuels. Fossil fuels are burned in power plants, factories, motor vehicles, and home heating systems. Ranching and using chemicals such as fertilizers also cause outdoor air pollution. Erosion of soil in farm fields, mining activities, and construction sites adds dust particles to the air as well. Some specific outdoor air pollutants are described in Table 25.1. Air Pollutant Sulfur oxides Nitrogen oxides Carbon monoxide Carbon dioxide Particles (dust, smoke) Mercury Smog Ground-level ozone Source coal burning motor vehicle exhaust motor vehicle exhaust all fossil fuel burning wood and coal burning coal burning coal burning motor vehicle exhaust Problem acid rain acid rain poisoning global climate change respiratory problems nerve poisoning respiratory problems respiratory problems 	erosion of soil adds dust particles to the atmosphere	true
Outdoor air pollution causes serious human health problems. For example, pollutants in the air are major contributors to respiratory and cardiovascular diseases. Air pollution may trigger asthma attacks and heart attacks in people with underlying health problems. In fact, more people die each year from air pollution than automobile accidents. 	fewer people die each year from air pollution than automobile accidents	false
Another major problem caused by air pollution is global climate change. Gases such as carbon dioxide from the burning of fossil fuels increase the greenhouse effect and raise Earths temperature. The greenhouse effect is a natural feature of Earths atmosphere. It occurs when certain gases in the atmosphere, including carbon dioxide, radiate the suns heat back down to Earths surface. Figure 25.2 shows how this happens. Without greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, the heat would escape into space. The natural greenhouse effect of Earths atmosphere keeps the planets temperature within a range that can support life. The rise in greenhouse gases due to human actions is too much of a good thing. It increases the greenhouse effect and causes Earths average temperature to rise. Rising global temperatures, in turn, are melting polar ice caps and glaciers. Figure 25.3 shows how much smaller the Arctic ice cap was in 2012 than it was in 1984. With more liquid water on Earths surface, sea levels are rising. Adding more heat energy to Earths atmosphere also causes more extreme weather and changes in precipitation patterns. Global warming is already causing food and water shortages and species extinctions. These problems will only grow worse unless steps are taken to curb greenhouse gases and global climate change. 	earth had no greenhouse gases until about 200 years ago	false
You may be able to avoid some of the health effects of outdoor air pollution by staying indoors on high-pollution days. However, some indoor air is just as polluted as outdoor air. 	air pollution is no longer a major problem in the us	false
Outdoor air pollution causes serious human health problems. For example, pollutants in the air are major contributors to respiratory and cardiovascular diseases. Air pollution may trigger asthma attacks and heart attacks in people with underlying health problems. In fact, more people die each year from air pollution than automobile accidents. 	heart attacks may be triggered by pollutants in the air	true
Air pollution may also cause acid rain. This is rain that is more acidic (has a lower pH) than normal rain. Acids form in the atmosphere when nitrogen and sulfur oxides mix with water in air. Nitrogen and sulfur oxides come mainly from motor vehicle exhaust and coal burning. If acid rain falls into lakes, it lowers the pH of the water and may kill aquatic organisms. If it falls on the ground, it may damage soil and soil organisms. If it falls on plants, it may make them sick or even kill them. Acid rain also damages stone buildings, bridges, and statues, like the one in Figure 25.1. 	acid rain may kill animals but does not affect plants	false
Another major problem caused by air pollution is global climate change. Gases such as carbon dioxide from the burning of fossil fuels increase the greenhouse effect and raise Earths temperature. The greenhouse effect is a natural feature of Earths atmosphere. It occurs when certain gases in the atmosphere, including carbon dioxide, radiate the suns heat back down to Earths surface. Figure 25.2 shows how this happens. Without greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, the heat would escape into space. The natural greenhouse effect of Earths atmosphere keeps the planets temperature within a range that can support life. The rise in greenhouse gases due to human actions is too much of a good thing. It increases the greenhouse effect and causes Earths average temperature to rise. Rising global temperatures, in turn, are melting polar ice caps and glaciers. Figure 25.3 shows how much smaller the Arctic ice cap was in 2012 than it was in 1984. With more liquid water on Earths surface, sea levels are rising. Adding more heat energy to Earths atmosphere also causes more extreme weather and changes in precipitation patterns. Global warming is already causing food and water shortages and species extinctions. These problems will only grow worse unless steps are taken to curb greenhouse gases and global climate change. 	earth had no greenhouse effect until human beings started burning fossil fuels	false
You may be able to avoid some of the health effects of outdoor air pollution by staying indoors on high-pollution days. However, some indoor air is just as polluted as outdoor air. 	outdoor air is always more polluted than indoor air	false
Outdoor air pollution causes serious human health problems. For example, pollutants in the air are major contributors to respiratory and cardiovascular diseases. Air pollution may trigger asthma attacks and heart attacks in people with underlying health problems. In fact, more people die each year from air pollution than automobile accidents. 	air pollution is a major contributor to respiratory diseases	true
You may be able to avoid some of the health effects of outdoor air pollution by staying indoors on high-pollution days. However, some indoor air is just as polluted as outdoor air. 	it is easier to control the quality of indoor air than outdoor air	true
The ocean is huge but even this body of water is becoming seriously polluted. Climate change also affects the quality of ocean water for living things. 	problem resulting from too much dissolved carbon dioxide in ocean water	1.e
Unlike runoff, which enters bodies of water everywhere, some sources of pollution enter the water at a single point. This type of water pollution is called point-source pollution. 	main way that nonpointsource pollution enters bodies of water	2.d
When fertilizer ends up in bodies of water, the added nutrients cause excessive growth of algae. This is called an algal bloom. You can see one in Figure 25.5. The algae out-compete other water organisms. They may make the water unfit for human consumption or recreation. 	main source of chemicals that cause algal blooms	3.c
Ocean water normally dissolves some of the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. The burning of fossil fuels has increased the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. As a result, ocean water is also dissolving more carbon dioxide. When carbon dioxide dissolves in water, it forms a weak acid. With higher levels of dissolved carbon dioxide in ocean water, the water becomes more acidic. This process is called ocean acidification. Ocean acidification can kill some aquatic organisms, including corals and shellfish. It may make it more difficult for other aquatic organisms to reproduce. Both effects of acidification interfere with marine food webs, threatening the survival of many aquatic organisms. 	area where water cannot support aquatic life because it is hypoxic	4.f
If heated water is released into a body of water, it may cause thermal pollution. Thermal pollution is a reduction in the quality of water because of an increase in water temperature. A common cause of thermal pollution is the use of water as a coolant by power plants and factories. This water is heated and then returned to the natural environment at a higher temperature. Warm water cant hold as much dissolved oxygen as cool water, so an increase in the temperature of water decreases the amount of oxygen it contains. Fish and other organisms adapted to a particular temperature range and oxygen concentration may be killed by the change in water temperature. 	reduction in water quality due to an increase in water temperature	5.g
When fertilizer ends up in bodies of water, the added nutrients cause excessive growth of algae. This is called an algal bloom. You can see one in Figure 25.5. The algae out-compete other water organisms. They may make the water unfit for human consumption or recreation. 	excessive growth of aquatic producers	6.a
Water pollution has many causes. One of the biggest causes is fertilizer in runoff. Runoff dissolves fertilizer as it flows over farm fields, lawns, and golf courses. It carries the dissolved fertilizer into bodies of water. More dissolved fertilizer may enter a body of water at the mouth of a river, but there is generally no single point where this type of pollution enters the water. Thats why this type of water pollution is called nonpoint-source pollution. 	habitat with moist soil such as a swamp	7.b
The ocean is huge but even this body of water is becoming seriously polluted. Climate change also affects the quality of ocean water for living things. 	trash that pollutes the ocean is made mainly of plastic	true
Ocean water normally dissolves some of the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. The burning of fossil fuels has increased the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. As a result, ocean water is also dissolving more carbon dioxide. When carbon dioxide dissolves in water, it forms a weak acid. With higher levels of dissolved carbon dioxide in ocean water, the water becomes more acidic. This process is called ocean acidification. Ocean acidification can kill some aquatic organisms, including corals and shellfish. It may make it more difficult for other aquatic organisms to reproduce. Both effects of acidification interfere with marine food webs, threatening the survival of many aquatic organisms. 	ocean acidification can kill corals and some shellfish	true
Unlike runoff, which enters bodies of water everywhere, some sources of pollution enter the water at a single point. This type of water pollution is called point-source pollution. 	an example of nonpointsource pollution is the release of pollution into water through a pipe from a	false
An example of point-source pollution is the release of pollution into a body of water through a pipe from a factory or sewage treatment plant. Waste water from a factory might contain dangerous chemicals such as strong acids, mercury, or lead. Water from a sewage treatment plant might contain untreated or partially treated sewage. Such pollution can make water dangerous for drinking or other uses. You can learn more about the problem of sewage contaminating the water in U.S. coastal communities by watching this video:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  In poor nations, many people have no choice but to drink water from polluted sources. Drinking sewage-contaminated water causes waterborne diseases, due to pathogens such as protozoa, viruses, or bacteria. Most waterborne diseases cause diarrhea. 	symptoms of waterborne diseases usually include diarrhea	true
Eventually, the algae in an algal bloom die and decompose. Their decomposition uses up oxygen in the water so that the water becomes hypoxic (without oxygen). This has occurred in many bodies of fresh water and large areas of the ocean, creating dead zones. Dead zones are areas where the hypoxic water cant support life. A very large dead zone exists in the Gulf of Mexico (see Figure 25.6). Nutrients carried into the Gulf by the Mississippi River caused this dead zone. Cutting down on the use of chemical fertilizers is one way to prevent dead zones in bodies of water. Preserving wetlands is also important. Wetlands are habitats such as swamps, marshes, and bogs where the ground is soggy or covered with water much of the year. Wetlands slow down and filter runoff before it reaches bodies of water. Wetlands also provide breeding grounds for many different species of organisms. 	the total number of people on earth who lack adequate clean fresh water is about a million	false
The ocean is huge but even this body of water is becoming seriously polluted. Climate change also affects the quality of ocean water for living things. 	less than half of earths water is in the ocean glaciers and ice caps	false
When fertilizer ends up in bodies of water, the added nutrients cause excessive growth of algae. This is called an algal bloom. You can see one in Figure 25.5. The algae out-compete other water organisms. They may make the water unfit for human consumption or recreation. 	algal blooms are due to excess nutrients polluting bodies of water	true
Eventually, the algae in an algal bloom die and decompose. Their decomposition uses up oxygen in the water so that the water becomes hypoxic (without oxygen). This has occurred in many bodies of fresh water and large areas of the ocean, creating dead zones. Dead zones are areas where the hypoxic water cant support life. A very large dead zone exists in the Gulf of Mexico (see Figure 25.6). Nutrients carried into the Gulf by the Mississippi River caused this dead zone. Cutting down on the use of chemical fertilizers is one way to prevent dead zones in bodies of water. Preserving wetlands is also important. Wetlands are habitats such as swamps, marshes, and bogs where the ground is soggy or covered with water much of the year. Wetlands slow down and filter runoff before it reaches bodies of water. Wetlands also provide breeding grounds for many different species of organisms. 	there is a very large dead zone in the gulf of mexico	true
Eventually, the algae in an algal bloom die and decompose. Their decomposition uses up oxygen in the water so that the water becomes hypoxic (without oxygen). This has occurred in many bodies of fresh water and large areas of the ocean, creating dead zones. Dead zones are areas where the hypoxic water cant support life. A very large dead zone exists in the Gulf of Mexico (see Figure 25.6). Nutrients carried into the Gulf by the Mississippi River caused this dead zone. Cutting down on the use of chemical fertilizers is one way to prevent dead zones in bodies of water. Preserving wetlands is also important. Wetlands are habitats such as swamps, marshes, and bogs where the ground is soggy or covered with water much of the year. Wetlands slow down and filter runoff before it reaches bodies of water. Wetlands also provide breeding grounds for many different species of organisms. 	examples of wetlands include marshes and bogs	true
An example of point-source pollution is the release of pollution into a body of water through a pipe from a factory or sewage treatment plant. Waste water from a factory might contain dangerous chemicals such as strong acids, mercury, or lead. Water from a sewage treatment plant might contain untreated or partially treated sewage. Such pollution can make water dangerous for drinking or other uses. You can learn more about the problem of sewage contaminating the water in U.S. coastal communities by watching this video:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  In poor nations, many people have no choice but to drink water from polluted sources. Drinking sewage-contaminated water causes waterborne diseases, due to pathogens such as protozoa, viruses, or bacteria. Most waterborne diseases cause diarrhea. 	waterborne diseases are caused by pathogens in drinking water	true
Unlike runoff, which enters bodies of water everywhere, some sources of pollution enter the water at a single point. This type of water pollution is called point-source pollution. 	virtually all thermal pollution of earths water is caused by global warming	false
The ocean is huge but even this body of water is becoming seriously polluted. Climate change also affects the quality of ocean water for living things. 	the ocean is so huge that it can never become seriously polluted	false
From a human point of view, natural resources can be classified as either renewable or nonrenewable. 	all natural resources are used for energy	false
From a human point of view, natural resources can be classified as either renewable or nonrenewable. 	some minerals are renewable resources	true
Nonrenewable resources are natural resources that cant be remade or else take too long to remake to keep up with human use. Examples of nonrenewable resources are coal, oil, and natural gas, all of which are fossil fuels. Fossil fuels form from the remains of plants and animals over hundreds of millions of years. We are using them up far faster than they can be replaced. At current rates of use, oil and natural gas will be used up in just a few decades, and coal will be used up in a couple of centuries. Uranium is another nonrenewable resource. It is used to produce nuclear power. Uranium is a naturally occurring chemical element that cant be remade. It will run out sooner or later if nuclear energy continues to be used. Soil is a very important natural resource. Plants need soil to grow, and plants are the basis of terrestrial ecosystems. Theoretically, soil can be remade. However, it takes millions of years for soil to form, so from a human point of view, it is a nonrenewable resource. Soil can be misused and eroded (see Figure 25.9). It must be used wisely to preserve it for the future. This means taking steps to avoid soil erosion and contamination of soil by toxins such as oil spills. 	it takes millions of years for fossil fuels to form	true
Nonrenewable resources are natural resources that cant be remade or else take too long to remake to keep up with human use. Examples of nonrenewable resources are coal, oil, and natural gas, all of which are fossil fuels. Fossil fuels form from the remains of plants and animals over hundreds of millions of years. We are using them up far faster than they can be replaced. At current rates of use, oil and natural gas will be used up in just a few decades, and coal will be used up in a couple of centuries. Uranium is another nonrenewable resource. It is used to produce nuclear power. Uranium is a naturally occurring chemical element that cant be remade. It will run out sooner or later if nuclear energy continues to be used. Soil is a very important natural resource. Plants need soil to grow, and plants are the basis of terrestrial ecosystems. Theoretically, soil can be remade. However, it takes millions of years for soil to form, so from a human point of view, it is a nonrenewable resource. Soil can be misused and eroded (see Figure 25.9). It must be used wisely to preserve it for the future. This means taking steps to avoid soil erosion and contamination of soil by toxins such as oil spills. 	at current rates of use oil will be used up in just a few decades	true
Fossil fuels and nuclear energy are nonrenewable energy resources. People worldwide depend far more on these energy sources than any others. Figure 25.10 shows the worldwide consumption of energy sources by type in 2010. Nonrenewable energy sources accounted for 83 percent of the total energy used. Fossil fuels and the uranium needed for nuclear power will soon be used up if we continue to consume them at these rates. Using fossil fuels and nuclear energy creates other problems as well. The burning of fossil fuels releases carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. This is one of the major greenhouse gases causing global climate change. Nuclear power creates another set of problems, including the disposal of radioactive waste. 	the use of nuclear power adds greenhouse gases to the atmosphere	false
Switching to renewable energy sources solves many of the problems associated with nonrenewable energy. While it may be expensive to develop renewable energy sources, they are clearly the way of the future. Figure 25.11 represents three different renewable energy sources: solar, wind, and biomass energy. The three types are described below. You can watch Bill Nyes introduction to renewable energy resources in this video:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Solar energy is energy provided by sunlight. Solar cells can turn sunlight into electricity. The energy in sunlight is virtually limitless and free and creates no pollution to use. Wind energy is energy provided by the blowing wind. Wind turbines, like those in Figure 25.11, can turn wind energy into electricity. The wind blows because of differences in heating of Earths atmosphere by the sun. There will never be a shortage of wind. Biomass energy is energy provided by burning or decomposing organic matter. For example, when garbage decomposes in a landfill, it releases methane gas. This gas can be captured and burned to produce electricity. Crops such as corn can also be converted into a liquid fuel and added to gasoline. Although biomass is renewable, burning it produces carbon dioxide, similar to fossil fuels. 	decomposition of garbage releases methane gas that can be used for fuel	true
Some of the resources we depend on the most are energy resources. Whether its powering our lights and computers, heating our homes, or providing energy for cars and other vehicles, its hard to imagine what our lives would be like without a constant supply of energy. 	led light bulbs use less energy than incandescent light bulbs	true
Switching to renewable energy sources solves many of the problems associated with nonrenewable energy. While it may be expensive to develop renewable energy sources, they are clearly the way of the future. Figure 25.11 represents three different renewable energy sources: solar, wind, and biomass energy. The three types are described below. You can watch Bill Nyes introduction to renewable energy resources in this video:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Solar energy is energy provided by sunlight. Solar cells can turn sunlight into electricity. The energy in sunlight is virtually limitless and free and creates no pollution to use. Wind energy is energy provided by the blowing wind. Wind turbines, like those in Figure 25.11, can turn wind energy into electricity. The wind blows because of differences in heating of Earths atmosphere by the sun. There will never be a shortage of wind. Biomass energy is energy provided by burning or decomposing organic matter. For example, when garbage decomposes in a landfill, it releases methane gas. This gas can be captured and burned to produce electricity. Crops such as corn can also be converted into a liquid fuel and added to gasoline. Although biomass is renewable, burning it produces carbon dioxide, similar to fossil fuels. 	energy provided by burning or decomposing organic matter	1.c
Renewable resources are natural resources that are remade by natural processes as quickly as people use them. Examples of renewable resources include sunlight and wind. They are in no danger of being used up. Metals and some other minerals are considered renewable as well because they are not destroyed when they are used. Instead, they can be recycled and used over and over again. Living things are also renewable resources. They can reproduce to replace themselves. However, living things can be over-used or misused to the point of extinction. For example, over-fishing has caused some of the best fishing spots in the ocean to be nearly depleted, threatening entire fish species with extinction. To be truly renewable, living things must be used wisely. They must be used in a way that meets the needs of the present generation but also preserves them for future generations. Using resources in this way is called sustainable use. 	resource that cannot be remade at all or as quickly as people use it	2.g
From a human point of view, natural resources can be classified as either renewable or nonrenewable. 	use of resources in a way that meets current needs and also the needs of future generations	3.e
From a human point of view, natural resources can be classified as either renewable or nonrenewable. 	coal oil or natural gas	4.f
Some of the resources we depend on the most are energy resources. Whether its powering our lights and computers, heating our homes, or providing energy for cars and other vehicles, its hard to imagine what our lives would be like without a constant supply of energy. 	the use of biomass energy does not contribute to air pollution	false
Nonrenewable resources are natural resources that cant be remade or else take too long to remake to keep up with human use. Examples of nonrenewable resources are coal, oil, and natural gas, all of which are fossil fuels. Fossil fuels form from the remains of plants and animals over hundreds of millions of years. We are using them up far faster than they can be replaced. At current rates of use, oil and natural gas will be used up in just a few decades, and coal will be used up in a couple of centuries. Uranium is another nonrenewable resource. It is used to produce nuclear power. Uranium is a naturally occurring chemical element that cant be remade. It will run out sooner or later if nuclear energy continues to be used. Soil is a very important natural resource. Plants need soil to grow, and plants are the basis of terrestrial ecosystems. Theoretically, soil can be remade. However, it takes millions of years for soil to form, so from a human point of view, it is a nonrenewable resource. Soil can be misused and eroded (see Figure 25.9). It must be used wisely to preserve it for the future. This means taking steps to avoid soil erosion and contamination of soil by toxins such as oil spills. 	fossil fuels form from organic remains that become buried under the ground	true
From a human point of view, natural resources can be classified as either renewable or nonrenewable. 	anything supplied by nature that helps support life	5.b
From a human point of view, natural resources can be classified as either renewable or nonrenewable. 	recycling is the best way to conserve natural resources	false
From a human point of view, natural resources can be classified as either renewable or nonrenewable. 	nonrenewable resource that plants need to grow	6.a
From a human point of view, natural resources can be classified as either renewable or nonrenewable. 	resource that is remade by natural processes as quickly as people use it	7.d
If an item can no longer be used or reused, try to recycle it. Recycling means taking a used item, breaking it down, and reusing the components. It generally takes less energy to recycle materials than obtain new ones. Recycling also keeps waste out of landfills. Some of the items that can be recycled include: glass, paper, cardboard, plastic, aluminum, iron, steel, batteries, electronics, tires, and concrete. You can learn how some of these materials are recycled by watching this video:  . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Even kitchen scraps and garden wastes can be recycled. They can be tossed into a compost bin, like the one in Figure 25.13. The recycled compost gradually breaks down to form rich humus that can be added to lawns and gardens to improve the soil. Encourage your family to recycle if they dont already. Even if you dont have curbside recycling where you live, there are likely to be recycling drop boxes or centers available for recycling many items. If you have recycling bins at school, be sure to use them. If not, raise the issue with your teacher or principal. You can also write a letter to the editor of your local newspaper encouraging everyone in your community to recycle. 	kitchen and garden wastes can be recycled by composting them	true
Switching to renewable energy sources solves many of the problems associated with nonrenewable energy. While it may be expensive to develop renewable energy sources, they are clearly the way of the future. Figure 25.11 represents three different renewable energy sources: solar, wind, and biomass energy. The three types are described below. You can watch Bill Nyes introduction to renewable energy resources in this video:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Solar energy is energy provided by sunlight. Solar cells can turn sunlight into electricity. The energy in sunlight is virtually limitless and free and creates no pollution to use. Wind energy is energy provided by the blowing wind. Wind turbines, like those in Figure 25.11, can turn wind energy into electricity. The wind blows because of differences in heating of Earths atmosphere by the sun. There will never be a shortage of wind. Biomass energy is energy provided by burning or decomposing organic matter. For example, when garbage decomposes in a landfill, it releases methane gas. This gas can be captured and burned to produce electricity. Crops such as corn can also be converted into a liquid fuel and added to gasoline. Although biomass is renewable, burning it produces carbon dioxide, similar to fossil fuels. 	methane gas produced by decomposing garbage is a fossil fuel	false
The light reactions occur in the first stage of photosynthesis. This stage takes place in the thylakoid membranes of the chloroplast. In the light reactions, energy from sunlight is absorbed by chlorophyll. This energy is temporarily transferred to two molecules: ATP and NADPH. These molecules are used to store the energy for the second stage of photosynthesis. The light reactions use water and produce oxygen. 	only heterotrophs need food for energy	false
Chemical energy that organisms need comes from food. The nearly universal food for life is the sugar glucose. Glucose is a simple carbohydrate with the chemical formula C6 H12 O6 . The glucose molecule stores chemical energy in a concentrated, stable form. In your body, glucose is the form of energy that is carried in your blood and taken up by each of your trillions of cells. 	atp is the concentrated form of energy that is carried by the blood and taken up by cells	false
What is the source of glucose for living things? It is made by plants and certain other organisms. The process in which glucose is made using energy in light is photosynthesis. This process requires carbon dioxide and water. It produces oxygen in addition to glucose. Photosynthesis consists of many chemical reactions. Overall, the reactions of photosynthesis can be summed up by this chemical equation: 6CO2 + 6H2 O + light energy ! C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 In words, this means that six molecules of carbon dioxide (CO2 ) combine with six molecules of water (H2 O) in the presence of light energy. This produces one molecule of glucose (C6 H12 O6 ) and six molecules of oxygen (O2 ). Use this interactive animation to learn more about photosynthesis: Click on this link for a song about photosynthesis to reinforce the basic ideas:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	producing one molecule of glucose requires six molecules of water	true
Types of organisms that make glucose by photosynthesis are pictured in Figure 4.7. They include plants, plant-like protists such as algae, and some kinds of bacteria. Living things that make glucose are called autotrophs ("self feeders"). All other living things obtain glucose by eating autotrophs (or organisms that eat autotrophs). These living things are called heterotrophs ("other feeders"). 	some protists can carry out photosynthesis	true
Chemical energy that organisms need comes from food. The nearly universal food for life is the sugar glucose. Glucose is a simple carbohydrate with the chemical formula C6 H12 O6 . The glucose molecule stores chemical energy in a concentrated, stable form. In your body, glucose is the form of energy that is carried in your blood and taken up by each of your trillions of cells. 	all living things need chemical energy for life processes	true
Chemical energy that organisms need comes from food. The nearly universal food for life is the sugar glucose. Glucose is a simple carbohydrate with the chemical formula C6 H12 O6 . The glucose molecule stores chemical energy in a concentrated, stable form. In your body, glucose is the form of energy that is carried in your blood and taken up by each of your trillions of cells. 	the chemical formula for glucose is c6h12o6	true
The structure of a chloroplast is shown in Figure 4.9. The chloroplast is surrounded by two membranes. Inside the chloroplast are stacks of flattened sacs of membrane, called thylakoids. The thylakoids contain chlorophyll. Surrounding the thylakoids is a space called the stroma. The stroma is filled with watery ("aqueous") fluid. 	thylakoids are stacks of flattened sacs in a chloroplast	true
Types of organisms that make glucose by photosynthesis are pictured in Figure 4.7. They include plants, plant-like protists such as algae, and some kinds of bacteria. Living things that make glucose are called autotrophs ("self feeders"). All other living things obtain glucose by eating autotrophs (or organisms that eat autotrophs). These living things are called heterotrophs ("other feeders"). 	organisms that make food for themselves and other living things are called heterotrophs	false
In plants and algae, photosynthesis takes place in chloroplasts. (Photosynthetic bacteria have other structures for this purpose.) A chloroplast is a type of plastid, or plant organelle. It contains the green pigment known as chlorophyll. The presence of chloroplasts in plant cells is one of the major ways they differ from animal cells. You can see chloroplasts in plant cells Figure 4.8. 	all photosynthesis takes place in chloroplasts	false
The structure of a chloroplast is shown in Figure 4.9. The chloroplast is surrounded by two membranes. Inside the chloroplast are stacks of flattened sacs of membrane, called thylakoids. The thylakoids contain chlorophyll. Surrounding the thylakoids is a space called the stroma. The stroma is filled with watery ("aqueous") fluid. 	each chloroplast is surrounded by two membranes	true
The Calvin cycle occurs in the second stage of photosynthesis. This stage takes place in the stroma of the chloroplast. In the Calvin cycle, carbon dioxide is used to produce glucose (sugar) using the energy stored in ATP and NADPH. The energy is released from these molecules when ATP loses phosphate (Pi ) to become ADP and NADPH loses hydrogen (H) to become NADP+ . 	the role of chlorophyll in photosynthesis is providing carbon for glucose	false
The light reactions occur in the first stage of photosynthesis. This stage takes place in the thylakoid membranes of the chloroplast. In the light reactions, energy from sunlight is absorbed by chlorophyll. This energy is temporarily transferred to two molecules: ATP and NADPH. These molecules are used to store the energy for the second stage of photosynthesis. The light reactions use water and produce oxygen. 	the second stage of photosynthesis takes place in the cytoplasm	false
Chemical energy that organisms need comes from food. The nearly universal food for life is the sugar glucose. Glucose is a simple carbohydrate with the chemical formula C6 H12 O6 . The glucose molecule stores chemical energy in a concentrated, stable form. In your body, glucose is the form of energy that is carried in your blood and taken up by each of your trillions of cells. 	any organism that uses energy to make glucose	1.f
The light reactions occur in the first stage of photosynthesis. This stage takes place in the thylakoid membranes of the chloroplast. In the light reactions, energy from sunlight is absorbed by chlorophyll. This energy is temporarily transferred to two molecules: ATP and NADPH. These molecules are used to store the energy for the second stage of photosynthesis. The light reactions use water and produce oxygen. 	second stage of photosynthesis	2.c
The light reactions occur in the first stage of photosynthesis. This stage takes place in the thylakoid membranes of the chloroplast. In the light reactions, energy from sunlight is absorbed by chlorophyll. This energy is temporarily transferred to two molecules: ATP and NADPH. These molecules are used to store the energy for the second stage of photosynthesis. The light reactions use water and produce oxygen. 	form of energy needed to fuel life processes in all living things	3.g
In plants and algae, photosynthesis takes place in chloroplasts. (Photosynthetic bacteria have other structures for this purpose.) A chloroplast is a type of plastid, or plant organelle. It contains the green pigment known as chlorophyll. The presence of chloroplasts in plant cells is one of the major ways they differ from animal cells. You can see chloroplasts in plant cells Figure 4.8. 	plant organelle where photosynthesis takes place	4.e
The light reactions occur in the first stage of photosynthesis. This stage takes place in the thylakoid membranes of the chloroplast. In the light reactions, energy from sunlight is absorbed by chlorophyll. This energy is temporarily transferred to two molecules: ATP and NADPH. These molecules are used to store the energy for the second stage of photosynthesis. The light reactions use water and produce oxygen. 	form of energy needed for photosynthesis	5.d
The light reactions occur in the first stage of photosynthesis. This stage takes place in the thylakoid membranes of the chloroplast. In the light reactions, energy from sunlight is absorbed by chlorophyll. This energy is temporarily transferred to two molecules: ATP and NADPH. These molecules are used to store the energy for the second stage of photosynthesis. The light reactions use water and produce oxygen. 	any organism that obtains energy from other living things	6.b
The light reactions occur in the first stage of photosynthesis. This stage takes place in the thylakoid membranes of the chloroplast. In the light reactions, energy from sunlight is absorbed by chlorophyll. This energy is temporarily transferred to two molecules: ATP and NADPH. These molecules are used to store the energy for the second stage of photosynthesis. The light reactions use water and produce oxygen. 	first stage of photosynthesis	7.a
Some organisms can produce ATP from glucose anaerobically. One way this happens is called fermentation. Fermentation includes the glycolysis step of cellular respiration. However, it doesnt include the other, aerobic steps. There are two types of fermentation: lactic acid fermentation and alcoholic fermentation. 	cellular respiration uses oxygen in addition to glucose	true
Some organisms can produce ATP from glucose anaerobically. One way this happens is called fermentation. Fermentation includes the glycolysis step of cellular respiration. However, it doesnt include the other, aerobic steps. There are two types of fermentation: lactic acid fermentation and alcoholic fermentation. 	cellular respiration takes place in the cells of all aerobic organisms	true
The pyruvate molecules from glycolysis next enter the matrix of a mitochondrion. Thats where the second stage of cellular respiration takes place. This stage is called the Krebs cycle. During this stage, two more molecules of ATP are produced. Other energy-storing molecules are also produced (to be used to make more ATP in stage 3). The Krebs cycle requires oxygen. Anything that needs oxygen is described as aerobic. The oxygen combines with the carbon from the pyruvate molecules. This forms carbon dioxide, a waste product. 	glycolysis takes place in the matrix of a mitochondrion	false
The third and final stage of cellular respiration is called electron transport. Remember the other energy-storing molecules from glycolysis and the Krebs cycle? Their energy is used in this stage to make many more molecules of ATP. In fact, during this stage, as many as 34 molecules of ATP are produced. Electron transport requires oxygen, so this stage is also aerobic. The oxygen combines with hydrogen from the energy-storing molecules. This forms water, another waste product. 	the second stage of cellular respiration produces four molecules of atp	false
Cellular respiration is the process in which cells break down glucose, release the stored energy, and use the energy to make ATP. For each glucose molecule that undergoes this process, up to 38 molecules of ATP are produced. Each ATP molecules forms when a phosphate is added to ADP, or adenosine diphosphate. This requires energy, which is stored in the ATP molecule. When cells need energy, a phosphate can be removed from ATP. This releases the energy and forms ADP again. 	an atp molecule forms when a phosphate is added to adp	true
Cellular respiration is the process in which cells break down glucose, release the stored energy, and use the energy to make ATP. For each glucose molecule that undergoes this process, up to 38 molecules of ATP are produced. Each ATP molecules forms when a phosphate is added to ADP, or adenosine diphosphate. This requires energy, which is stored in the ATP molecule. When cells need energy, a phosphate can be removed from ATP. This releases the energy and forms ADP again. 	cells without mitochondria cannot break down glucose for energy	false
The third and final stage of cellular respiration is called electron transport. Remember the other energy-storing molecules from glycolysis and the Krebs cycle? Their energy is used in this stage to make many more molecules of ATP. In fact, during this stage, as many as 34 molecules of ATP are produced. Electron transport requires oxygen, so this stage is also aerobic. The oxygen combines with hydrogen from the energy-storing molecules. This forms water, another waste product. 	a waste product of electron transport is water	true
Some organisms can produce ATP from glucose anaerobically. One way this happens is called fermentation. Fermentation includes the glycolysis step of cellular respiration. However, it doesnt include the other, aerobic steps. There are two types of fermentation: lactic acid fermentation and alcoholic fermentation. 	all three stages of cellular respiration are aerobic	false
Cellular respiration and photosynthesis are like two sides of the same coin. This is clear from the diagram in Figure needed for photosynthesis. Together, the two processes store and release energy in virtually all living things. 	the products of photosynthesis are the reactants of cellular respiration	true
Some organisms can produce ATP from glucose anaerobically. One way this happens is called fermentation. Fermentation includes the glycolysis step of cellular respiration. However, it doesnt include the other, aerobic steps. There are two types of fermentation: lactic acid fermentation and alcoholic fermentation. 	fermentation produces atp from lactic acid or alcohol	false
The third and final stage of cellular respiration is called electron transport. Remember the other energy-storing molecules from glycolysis and the Krebs cycle? Their energy is used in this stage to make many more molecules of ATP. In fact, during this stage, as many as 34 molecules of ATP are produced. Electron transport requires oxygen, so this stage is also aerobic. The oxygen combines with hydrogen from the energy-storing molecules. This forms water, another waste product. 	water forms as a waste product during the second stage of cellular respiration	false
The third and final stage of cellular respiration is called electron transport. Remember the other energy-storing molecules from glycolysis and the Krebs cycle? Their energy is used in this stage to make many more molecules of ATP. In fact, during this stage, as many as 34 molecules of ATP are produced. Electron transport requires oxygen, so this stage is also aerobic. The oxygen combines with hydrogen from the energy-storing molecules. This forms water, another waste product. 	the final stage of cellular respiration is called electron transport	true
Cellular respiration and photosynthesis are like two sides of the same coin. This is clear from the diagram in Figure needed for photosynthesis. Together, the two processes store and release energy in virtually all living things. 	second stage of cellular respiration	1.e
Cellular respiration takes place in the cells of all organisms. It occurs in autotrophs such as plants as well as heterotrophs such as animals. Cellular respiration begins in the cytoplasm of cells. It is completed in mitochondria. The mitochondrion is a membrane-enclosed organelle in the cytoplasm. Its sometimes called the "powerhouse" of the cell because of its role in cellular respiration. Figure 4.12 shows the parts of the mitochondrion involved in cellular respiration. 	organelle that is called the powerhouse of the cell	2.g
Cellular respiration is the process in which cells break down glucose, release the stored energy, and use the energy to make ATP. For each glucose molecule that undergoes this process, up to 38 molecules of ATP are produced. Each ATP molecules forms when a phosphate is added to ADP, or adenosine diphosphate. This requires energy, which is stored in the ATP molecule. When cells need energy, a phosphate can be removed from ATP. This releases the energy and forms ADP again. 	process in which cells burn glucose for energy	3.c
Some organisms can produce ATP from glucose anaerobically. One way this happens is called fermentation. Fermentation includes the glycolysis step of cellular respiration. However, it doesnt include the other, aerobic steps. There are two types of fermentation: lactic acid fermentation and alcoholic fermentation. 	process in which yeasts in bread produce atp from glucose	4.f
Some organisms can produce ATP from glucose anaerobically. One way this happens is called fermentation. Fermentation includes the glycolysis step of cellular respiration. However, it doesnt include the other, aerobic steps. There are two types of fermentation: lactic acid fermentation and alcoholic fermentation. 	process in which bacteria in yogurt produce atp from glucose	5.d
Cellular respiration and photosynthesis are like two sides of the same coin. This is clear from the diagram in Figure needed for photosynthesis. Together, the two processes store and release energy in virtually all living things. 	first stage of cellular respiration	6.a
The third and final stage of cellular respiration is called electron transport. Remember the other energy-storing molecules from glycolysis and the Krebs cycle? Their energy is used in this stage to make many more molecules of ATP. In fact, during this stage, as many as 34 molecules of ATP are produced. Electron transport requires oxygen, so this stage is also aerobic. The oxygen combines with hydrogen from the energy-storing molecules. This forms water, another waste product. 	final stage of cellular respiration	7.b
Mutations have many possible causes. Some mutations occur when a mistake is made during DNA replication or transcription. Other mutations occur because of environmental factors. Anything in the environment that causes a mutation is known as a mutagen. Examples of mutagens are shown in Figure 5.21. They include ultraviolet rays in sunlight, chemicals in cigarette smoke, and certain viruses and bacteria. 	some mutations occur when errors are made in copying dna	true
The genetic code has three other important characteristics. The genetic code is the same in all living things. This shows that all organisms are related by descent from a common ancestor. Each codon codes for just one amino acid (or start or stop). This is necessary so the correct amino acid is always selected. Most amino acids are encoded by more than one codon. This is helpful. It reduces the risk of the wrong amino acid being selected if there is a mistake in the code. 	the genetic code is the same in all living things	true
The process in which proteins are made is called protein synthesis. It occurs in two main steps. The steps are transcription and translation. Watch this video for a good introduction to both steps of protein synthesis: http://w MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the translation step of protein synthesis takes place in the nucleus	false
DNA and RNA are nucleic acids. DNA stores genetic information. RNA helps build proteins. Proteins, in turn, determine the structure and function of all your cells. Proteins consist of chains of amino acids. A proteins structure and function depends on the sequence of its amino acids. Instructions for this sequence are encoded in DNA. In eukaryotic cells, chromosomes are contained within the nucleus. But proteins are made in the cytoplasm at structures called ribosomes. How do the instructions in DNA reach the ribosomes in the cytoplasm? RNA is needed for this task. 	rna is a doublestranded nucleic acid	false
RNA stands for ribonucleic acid. RNA is smaller than DNA. It can squeeze through pores in the membrane that encloses the nucleus. It copies instructions in DNA and carries them to a ribosome in the cytoplasm. Then it helps build the protein. RNA is not only smaller than DNA. It differs from DNA in other ways as well. It consists of one nucleotide chain rather than two chains as in DNA. It also contains the nitrogen base uracil (U) instead of thymine (T). In addition, it contains the sugar ribose instead of deoxyribose. You can see these differences in Figure 5.16. 	uracil is a nitrogen base found only in rna	true
The genetic code has three other important characteristics. The genetic code is the same in all living things. This shows that all organisms are related by descent from a common ancestor. Each codon codes for just one amino acid (or start or stop). This is necessary so the correct amino acid is always selected. Most amino acids are encoded by more than one codon. This is helpful. It reduces the risk of the wrong amino acid being selected if there is a mistake in the code. 	a nonsense mutation is caused by a premature stop codon	true
DNA and RNA are nucleic acids. DNA stores genetic information. RNA helps build proteins. Proteins, in turn, determine the structure and function of all your cells. Proteins consist of chains of amino acids. A proteins structure and function depends on the sequence of its amino acids. Instructions for this sequence are encoded in DNA. In eukaryotic cells, chromosomes are contained within the nucleus. But proteins are made in the cytoplasm at structures called ribosomes. How do the instructions in DNA reach the ribosomes in the cytoplasm? RNA is needed for this task. 	the function of rna is to help build proteins	true
How is the information for making proteins encoded in DNA? The answer is the genetic code. The genetic code is based on the sequence of nitrogen bases in DNA. The four bases make up the letters of the code. Groups of three bases each make up code words. These three-letter code words are called codons. Each codon stands for one amino acid or else for a start or stop signal. There are 20 amino acids that make up proteins. With three bases per codon, there are 64 possible codons. This is more than enough to code for the 20 amino acids plus start and stop signals. You can see how to translate the genetic code in Figure 5.17. Start at the center of the chart for the first base of each three-base codon. Then work your way out from the center for the second and third bases. Find the codon AUG in Figure 5.17. It codes for the amino acid methionine. It also codes for the start signal. After an AUG start codon, the next three letters are read as the second codon. The next three letters after that are read as the third codon, and so on. You can see how this works in Figure 5.18. The figure shows the bases in a molecule 	the genetic code is the sequence of nitrogen bases in dna	true
Mutations have many possible causes. Some mutations occur when a mistake is made during DNA replication or transcription. Other mutations occur because of environmental factors. Anything in the environment that causes a mutation is known as a mutagen. Examples of mutagens are shown in Figure 5.21. They include ultraviolet rays in sunlight, chemicals in cigarette smoke, and certain viruses and bacteria. 	down syndrome is caused by a point mutation	false
How is the information for making proteins encoded in DNA? The answer is the genetic code. The genetic code is based on the sequence of nitrogen bases in DNA. The four bases make up the letters of the code. Groups of three bases each make up code words. These three-letter code words are called codons. Each codon stands for one amino acid or else for a start or stop signal. There are 20 amino acids that make up proteins. With three bases per codon, there are 64 possible codons. This is more than enough to code for the 20 amino acids plus start and stop signals. You can see how to translate the genetic code in Figure 5.17. Start at the center of the chart for the first base of each three-base codon. Then work your way out from the center for the second and third bases. Find the codon AUG in Figure 5.17. It codes for the amino acid methionine. It also codes for the start signal. After an AUG start codon, the next three letters are read as the second codon. The next three letters after that are read as the third codon, and so on. You can see how this works in Figure 5.18. The figure shows the bases in a molecule 	the codon aug is the start codon	true
The genetic code has three other important characteristics. The genetic code is the same in all living things. This shows that all organisms are related by descent from a common ancestor. Each codon codes for just one amino acid (or start or stop). This is necessary so the correct amino acid is always selected. Most amino acids are encoded by more than one codon. This is helpful. It reduces the risk of the wrong amino acid being selected if there is a mistake in the code. 	a mutated codon always codes for a different amino acid	false
RNA stands for ribonucleic acid. RNA is smaller than DNA. It can squeeze through pores in the membrane that encloses the nucleus. It copies instructions in DNA and carries them to a ribosome in the cytoplasm. Then it helps build the protein. RNA is not only smaller than DNA. It differs from DNA in other ways as well. It consists of one nucleotide chain rather than two chains as in DNA. It also contains the nitrogen base uracil (U) instead of thymine (T). In addition, it contains the sugar ribose instead of deoxyribose. You can see these differences in Figure 5.16. 	rna contains the sugar deoxyribose	false
How is the information for making proteins encoded in DNA? The answer is the genetic code. The genetic code is based on the sequence of nitrogen bases in DNA. The four bases make up the letters of the code. Groups of three bases each make up code words. These three-letter code words are called codons. Each codon stands for one amino acid or else for a start or stop signal. There are 20 amino acids that make up proteins. With three bases per codon, there are 64 possible codons. This is more than enough to code for the 20 amino acids plus start and stop signals. You can see how to translate the genetic code in Figure 5.17. Start at the center of the chart for the first base of each three-base codon. Then work your way out from the center for the second and third bases. Find the codon AUG in Figure 5.17. It codes for the amino acid methionine. It also codes for the start signal. After an AUG start codon, the next three letters are read as the second codon. The next three letters after that are read as the third codon, and so on. You can see how this works in Figure 5.18. The figure shows the bases in a molecule 	nitrogen base found only in dna	1.e
There are three different types of RNA. All three types are needed to make proteins. Messenger RNA (mRNA) copies genetic instructions from DNA in the nucleus. Then it carries the instructions to a ribosome in the cytoplasm. Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) helps form a ribosome. This is where the protein is made. Transfer RNA (tRNA) brings amino acids to the ribosome. The amino acids are then joined together to make the protein. 	type of rna that copies dna in the nucleus	2.d
The genetic code has three other important characteristics. The genetic code is the same in all living things. This shows that all organisms are related by descent from a common ancestor. Each codon codes for just one amino acid (or start or stop). This is necessary so the correct amino acid is always selected. Most amino acids are encoded by more than one codon. This is helpful. It reduces the risk of the wrong amino acid being selected if there is a mistake in the code. 	doublestranded nucleic acid	3.f
RNA stands for ribonucleic acid. RNA is smaller than DNA. It can squeeze through pores in the membrane that encloses the nucleus. It copies instructions in DNA and carries them to a ribosome in the cytoplasm. Then it helps build the protein. RNA is not only smaller than DNA. It differs from DNA in other ways as well. It consists of one nucleotide chain rather than two chains as in DNA. It also contains the nitrogen base uracil (U) instead of thymine (T). In addition, it contains the sugar ribose instead of deoxyribose. You can see these differences in Figure 5.16. 	nitrogen base found only in rna	4.a
There are three different types of RNA. All three types are needed to make proteins. Messenger RNA (mRNA) copies genetic instructions from DNA in the nucleus. Then it carries the instructions to a ribosome in the cytoplasm. Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) helps form a ribosome. This is where the protein is made. Transfer RNA (tRNA) brings amino acids to the ribosome. The amino acids are then joined together to make the protein. 	type of rna that helps form a ribosome	5.b
The genetic code has three other important characteristics. The genetic code is the same in all living things. This shows that all organisms are related by descent from a common ancestor. Each codon codes for just one amino acid (or start or stop). This is necessary so the correct amino acid is always selected. Most amino acids are encoded by more than one codon. This is helpful. It reduces the risk of the wrong amino acid being selected if there is a mistake in the code. 	any singlestranded nucleic acid	6.c
There are three different types of RNA. All three types are needed to make proteins. Messenger RNA (mRNA) copies genetic instructions from DNA in the nucleus. Then it carries the instructions to a ribosome in the cytoplasm. Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) helps form a ribosome. This is where the protein is made. Transfer RNA (tRNA) brings amino acids to the ribosome. The amino acids are then joined together to make the protein. 	type of rna that brings amino acids to a ribosome	7.g
How did Darwin come up with the theory of evolution by natural selection? A major influence was an amazing scientific expedition he took on a ship called the Beagle. Darwin was only 22 years old when the ship set sail. The trip lasted for almost five years and circled the globe. Figure 7.2 shows the route the ship took. It set off from Plymouth, England in 1831. It wouldnt return to Plymouth until 1836. Imagine setting out for such an incredible adventure at age 22, and youll understand why the trip had such a big influence on Darwin. Darwins job on the voyage was to observe and collect specimens whenever the ship went ashore. This included plants, animals, rocks, and fossils. Darwin loved nature, so the job was ideal for him. During the long voyage, he made many observations that helped him form his theory of evolution. Some of his most important observations were made on the Galpagos Islands. The 16 Galpagos Islands lie 966 kilometers (about 600 miles) off the west coast of South America. (You can see their location on the map in Figure 7.2.) Some of the animals Darwin observed on the islands were giant tortoises and birds called finches. Watch this video for an excellent introduction to Darwin, his voyage, and the Galpagos: 	darwins job on the beagle was to observe and collect specimens wherever the ship went ashore	true
Darwin spent many years thinking about his own observations and the writings of Lamarck, Lyell, and Malthus. What did it all mean? How did it all fit together? The answer, of course, is the theory of evolution by natural selection. 	darwin never observed fossils so they had no influence on his theory of evolution	false
Darwin also observed that each of the Galpagos Islands had its own species of finches. The finches on different islands had beaks that differed in size and shape. You can see four examples in Figure 7.4. Darwin investigated further. He found that the different beaks seemed to suit the birds for the food available on their island. For example, finch number 1 in Figure 7.4 used its large, strong beak to crack open and eat big, tough seeds. Finch number 4 had a long, pointed beak that was ideal for eating insects. This seemed reasonable, but how had it come about? 	darwin found that the different beaks of galpagos finches seemed to suit them for different types of	true
Darwin spent many years thinking about his own observations and the writings of Lamarck, Lyell, and Malthus. What did it all mean? How did it all fit together? The answer, of course, is the theory of evolution by natural selection. 	lamarcks ideas about evolution were influenced by darwins theory of evolution by natural selection	false
Darwin spent many years thinking about his own observations and the writings of Lamarck, Lyell, and Malthus. What did it all mean? How did it all fit together? The answer, of course, is the theory of evolution by natural selection. 	darwins ideas about natural selection were influenced directly by a book written by charles lyell	false
Darwin spent many years thinking about his own observations and the writings of Lamarck, Lyell, and Malthus. What did it all mean? How did it all fit together? The answer, of course, is the theory of evolution by natural selection. 	the theory of evolution by natural selection explains and unifies all of life science	true
The Galpagos Islands are still famous for their giant tortoises. These gentle giants are found almost nowhere else in the world. Darwin was amazed by their huge size. He was also struck by the variety of shapes of their shells. You can see two examples in Figure 7.3. Each island had tortoises with a different shell shape. The local people even could tell which island a tortoise came from based on the shape of its shell. Darwin wondered how each island came to have its own type of tortoise. He found out that tortoises with dome- shaped shells lived on islands where the plants they ate were abundant and easy to reach. Tortoises with saddle- shaped shells, in contrast, lived on islands that were drier. On those islands, food was often scarce. The saddle shape of their shells allowed tortoises on those islands to reach up and graze on vegetation high above them. This made sense, but how had it happened? 	all of the giant galpagos tortoises are now extinct	false
Darwin knew that people could breed plants and animals to have useful traits. By selecting which individuals were allowed to reproduce, they could change an organisms traits over several generations. Darwin called this type of change in organisms artificial selection. You can see an example in Figure 7.5. Keeping and breeding pigeons was a popular hobby in Darwins day. Both types of pigeons in the bottom row were bred from the common rock pigeon at the top of the figure. 	animal breeders produce animals with desired traits by selecting which animals are allowed to	true
Darwins theory of evolution by natural selection contains two major ideas: One idea is that evolution happens. Evolution is a change in the inherited traits of organisms over time. Living things have changed as descendants diverged from common ancestors in the past. The other idea is that evolution occurs by natural selection. Natural selection is the process in which living things with beneficial traits produce more offspring. As a result, their traits increase in the population over time. 	lamarcks explanation for how evolution occurs was essentially the same as darwins	false
Darwin spent many years thinking about his own observations and the writings of Lamarck, Lyell, and Malthus. What did it all mean? How did it all fit together? The answer, of course, is the theory of evolution by natural selection. 	according to malthus disease and famine kill off the weakest people when human populations	true
Darwin finally published his theory of evolution by natural selection in 1859. He presented it in his book On the Origin of Species. The book is very detailed and includes a lot of evidence for the theory. Darwins book changed science forever. The theory of evolution by natural selection became the unifying theory of all life science. 	darwin knew nothing about the fossil evidence for evolution	false
Darwin spent many years thinking about his own observations and the writings of Lamarck, Lyell, and Malthus. What did it all mean? How did it all fit together? The answer, of course, is the theory of evolution by natural selection. 	darwins book on evolution by natural selection was rejected because it contained very little	false
Darwin spent many years thinking about his own observations and the writings of Lamarck, Lyell, and Malthus. What did it all mean? How did it all fit together? The answer, of course, is the theory of evolution by natural selection. 	islands where darwin made many important observations	1.c
Darwin finally published his theory of evolution by natural selection in 1859. He presented it in his book On the Origin of Species. The book is very detailed and includes a lot of evidence for the theory. Darwins book changed science forever. The theory of evolution by natural selection became the unifying theory of all life science. 	scientist who provided geologic evidence that earth is very old	2.d
There were three other scientists in particular that influenced Darwin. Their names are Lamarck, Lyell, and Malthus. All three were somewhat older than Darwin, and he was familiar with their writings. Jean Baptiste Lamarck was a French naturalist. He was one of the first scientists to propose that species change over time. In other words, he proposed that evolution occurs. Lamarck also tried to explain how it happens, but he got that part wrong. Lamarck thought that the traits an organism developed during its life time could be passed on to its offspring. He called this the inheritance of acquired characteristics. Charles Lyell was an English geologist. He wrote a famous book called Principles of Geology. Darwin took the book with him on the Beagle. Lyell argued that geological processes such as erosion change Earths surface very gradually. To account for all the changes that had occurred on the planet, Earth must be a lot older than most people believed. Thomas Malthus was an English economist. He wrote a popular essay called On Population. He argued that human populations have the potential to grow faster than the resources they need. When populations get too big, disease and famine occur. These calamities control population size by killing off the weakest people. 	scientist who argued that populations have the potential to grow faster than the resources they need	3.f
Darwins theory of evolution by natural selection contains two major ideas: One idea is that evolution happens. Evolution is a change in the inherited traits of organisms over time. Living things have changed as descendants diverged from common ancestors in the past. The other idea is that evolution occurs by natural selection. Natural selection is the process in which living things with beneficial traits produce more offspring. As a result, their traits increase in the population over time. 	change in the inherited traits of organisms over time	4.e
There were three other scientists in particular that influenced Darwin. Their names are Lamarck, Lyell, and Malthus. All three were somewhat older than Darwin, and he was familiar with their writings. Jean Baptiste Lamarck was a French naturalist. He was one of the first scientists to propose that species change over time. In other words, he proposed that evolution occurs. Lamarck also tried to explain how it happens, but he got that part wrong. Lamarck thought that the traits an organism developed during its life time could be passed on to its offspring. He called this the inheritance of acquired characteristics. Charles Lyell was an English geologist. He wrote a famous book called Principles of Geology. Darwin took the book with him on the Beagle. Lyell argued that geological processes such as erosion change Earths surface very gradually. To account for all the changes that had occurred on the planet, Earth must be a lot older than most people believed. Thomas Malthus was an English economist. He wrote a popular essay called On Population. He argued that human populations have the potential to grow faster than the resources they need. When populations get too big, disease and famine occur. These calamities control population size by killing off the weakest people. 	scientist who proposed that living things change over time through the inheritance of acquired	5.b
Darwins theory of evolution by natural selection contains two major ideas: One idea is that evolution happens. Evolution is a change in the inherited traits of organisms over time. Living things have changed as descendants diverged from common ancestors in the past. The other idea is that evolution occurs by natural selection. Natural selection is the process in which living things with beneficial traits produce more offspring. As a result, their traits increase in the population over time. 	process in which living things with beneficial traits produce more offspring so their traits increase	6.a
Darwin spent many years thinking about his own observations and the writings of Lamarck, Lyell, and Malthus. What did it all mean? How did it all fit together? The answer, of course, is the theory of evolution by natural selection. 	scientist who proposed the theory of evolution by natural selection	7.g
Fossils are the preserved remains or traces of organisms that lived during earlier ages. Remains that become fossils are generally the hard parts of organismsmainly bones, teeth, or shells. Traces include any evidence of life, such as footprints like the dinosaur footprint in Figure 7.7. Fossils are like a window into the past. They provide direct evidence of what life was like long ago. A scientist who studies fossils to learn about the evolution of living things is called a paleontologist. 	evidence for evolution includes millions of fossils	true
Scientists have learned a lot about evolution by comparing living organisms. They have compared body parts, embryos, and molecules such as DNA and proteins. 	fossils generally form from the hard parts of organisms	true
Scientists have learned a lot about evolution by comparing living organisms. They have compared body parts, embryos, and molecules such as DNA and proteins. 	it is very common for dead organisms to become fossils	false
The soft parts of organisms almost always decompose quickly after death. Thats why most fossils consist of hard parts such as bones. Its rare even for hard parts to remain intact long enough to become fossils. Fossils form when water seeps through the remains and deposits minerals in them. The remains literally turn to stone. Remains are more likely to form fossils if they are covered quickly by sediments. Once in a while, remains are preserved almost unchanged. For example, they may be frozen in glaciers. Or they may be trapped in tree resin that hardens to form amber. Thats what happened to the wasp in Figure 7.8. The wasp lived about 20 million years ago, but even its fragile wings have been preserved by the amber. 	remains are less likely to become fossils if they are covered quickly by sediments	false
The soft parts of organisms almost always decompose quickly after death. Thats why most fossils consist of hard parts such as bones. Its rare even for hard parts to remain intact long enough to become fossils. Fossils form when water seeps through the remains and deposits minerals in them. The remains literally turn to stone. Remains are more likely to form fossils if they are covered quickly by sediments. Once in a while, remains are preserved almost unchanged. For example, they may be frozen in glaciers. Or they may be trapped in tree resin that hardens to form amber. Thats what happened to the wasp in Figure 7.8. The wasp lived about 20 million years ago, but even its fragile wings have been preserved by the amber. 	some fossils form when dead organisms are frozen in glaciers	true
Fossils are useful for reconstructing the past only if they can be dated. Scientists need to determine when the organisms lived who left behind the fossils. Fossils can be dated in two different ways: absolute dating and relative dating. Absolute dating determines about how long ago a fossil organism lived. This gives the fossil an approximate age in years. Absolute dating is often based on the amount of carbon-14 or other radioactive element that remains in a fossil. You can learn how carbon-14 dating works by watching this short video: Relative dating determines which of two fossils is older or younger than the other but not their age in years. Relative dating is based on the positions of fossils in rock layers. Lower rock layers were laid down earlier, so they are assumed to contain older fossils. This is illustrated in Figure 7.9. 	relative dating can be used to determine how long ago a fossil organism lived	false
Comparing body parts of different species may reveal evidence for evolution. For example, all mammals have front limbs that look quite different and are used for different purposes. Bats use their front limbs to fly, whales use them to swim, and cats use them to run and climb. However, the front limbs of all three animalsas well as humanshave the same basic underlying bone structure. You can see this in Figure 7.11. The similar bones provide evidence that all four animals evolved from a common ancestor. 	fossil evidence shows that whales evolved from mammals that had always lived in the ocean	false
Fossils are the preserved remains or traces of organisms that lived during earlier ages. Remains that become fossils are generally the hard parts of organismsmainly bones, teeth, or shells. Traces include any evidence of life, such as footprints like the dinosaur footprint in Figure 7.7. Fossils are like a window into the past. They provide direct evidence of what life was like long ago. A scientist who studies fossils to learn about the evolution of living things is called a paleontologist. 	the footprints of animals are sometimes preserved as fossils	true
Fossils are useful for reconstructing the past only if they can be dated. Scientists need to determine when the organisms lived who left behind the fossils. Fossils can be dated in two different ways: absolute dating and relative dating. Absolute dating determines about how long ago a fossil organism lived. This gives the fossil an approximate age in years. Absolute dating is often based on the amount of carbon-14 or other radioactive element that remains in a fossil. You can learn how carbon-14 dating works by watching this short video: Relative dating determines which of two fossils is older or younger than the other but not their age in years. Relative dating is based on the positions of fossils in rock layers. Lower rock layers were laid down earlier, so they are assumed to contain older fossils. This is illustrated in Figure 7.9. 	carbon14 dating is a method of relative dating	false
The soft parts of organisms almost always decompose quickly after death. Thats why most fossils consist of hard parts such as bones. Its rare even for hard parts to remain intact long enough to become fossils. Fossils form when water seeps through the remains and deposits minerals in them. The remains literally turn to stone. Remains are more likely to form fossils if they are covered quickly by sediments. Once in a while, remains are preserved almost unchanged. For example, they may be frozen in glaciers. Or they may be trapped in tree resin that hardens to form amber. Thats what happened to the wasp in Figure 7.8. The wasp lived about 20 million years ago, but even its fragile wings have been preserved by the amber. 	some fossils form when organisms are preserved in amber	true
Comparing body parts of different species may reveal evidence for evolution. For example, all mammals have front limbs that look quite different and are used for different purposes. Bats use their front limbs to fly, whales use them to swim, and cats use them to run and climb. However, the front limbs of all three animalsas well as humanshave the same basic underlying bone structure. You can see this in Figure 7.11. The similar bones provide evidence that all four animals evolved from a common ancestor. 	whales evolved from a fourlegged ancestor	true
An embryo is an organism in the earliest stages of development. Embryos of different species may look quite similar, even when the adult forms look very different. Look at the drawings of embryos in Figure 7.12. They represent very early life stages of a chicken, turtle, pig, and human being. The embryos look so similar that its hard to tell them apart. Such similarities provide evidence that all four types of animals are related. They help document that evolution has occurred. 	closely related animals generally look more similar as they grow older	false
Fossils are useful for reconstructing the past only if they can be dated. Scientists need to determine when the organisms lived who left behind the fossils. Fossils can be dated in two different ways: absolute dating and relative dating. Absolute dating determines about how long ago a fossil organism lived. This gives the fossil an approximate age in years. Absolute dating is often based on the amount of carbon-14 or other radioactive element that remains in a fossil. You can learn how carbon-14 dating works by watching this short video: Relative dating determines which of two fossils is older or younger than the other but not their age in years. Relative dating is based on the positions of fossils in rock layers. Lower rock layers were laid down earlier, so they are assumed to contain older fossils. This is illustrated in Figure 7.9. 	any method of estimating the age of fossils that determines only which of two fossils is older or	1.c
Fossils are useful for reconstructing the past only if they can be dated. Scientists need to determine when the organisms lived who left behind the fossils. Fossils can be dated in two different ways: absolute dating and relative dating. Absolute dating determines about how long ago a fossil organism lived. This gives the fossil an approximate age in years. Absolute dating is often based on the amount of carbon-14 or other radioactive element that remains in a fossil. You can learn how carbon-14 dating works by watching this short video: Relative dating determines which of two fossils is older or younger than the other but not their age in years. Relative dating is based on the positions of fossils in rock layers. Lower rock layers were laid down earlier, so they are assumed to contain older fossils. This is illustrated in Figure 7.9. 	any evidence other than organic remains that a living organism leaves behind	2.e
Scientists have learned a lot about evolution by comparing living organisms. They have compared body parts, embryos, and molecules such as DNA and proteins. 	molecule that is compared among species to estimate how long it has been since they diverged from	3.b
The soft parts of organisms almost always decompose quickly after death. Thats why most fossils consist of hard parts such as bones. Its rare even for hard parts to remain intact long enough to become fossils. Fossils form when water seeps through the remains and deposits minerals in them. The remains literally turn to stone. Remains are more likely to form fossils if they are covered quickly by sediments. Once in a while, remains are preserved almost unchanged. For example, they may be frozen in glaciers. Or they may be trapped in tree resin that hardens to form amber. Thats what happened to the wasp in Figure 7.8. The wasp lived about 20 million years ago, but even its fragile wings have been preserved by the amber. 	hardened tree resin	4.a
Some of the most interesting evidence for evolution comes from vestigial structures. These are body parts that are no longer used but are still present in modern organisms. Examples in humans include tail bones and the appendix. Human beings obviously dont have tails, but our ancestors did. We still have bones at the base of our spine that form a tail in other, related animals, such as monkeys. The appendix is a tiny remnant of a once-larger organ. In a distant ancestor, it was needed to digest food. If your appendix becomes infected, a surgeon can remove it. You wont miss it because it no longer has any purpose in the human body. 	body part that is no longer used but is still present in modern organisms	5.g
Fossils are useful for reconstructing the past only if they can be dated. Scientists need to determine when the organisms lived who left behind the fossils. Fossils can be dated in two different ways: absolute dating and relative dating. Absolute dating determines about how long ago a fossil organism lived. This gives the fossil an approximate age in years. Absolute dating is often based on the amount of carbon-14 or other radioactive element that remains in a fossil. You can learn how carbon-14 dating works by watching this short video: Relative dating determines which of two fossils is older or younger than the other but not their age in years. Relative dating is based on the positions of fossils in rock layers. Lower rock layers were laid down earlier, so they are assumed to contain older fossils. This is illustrated in Figure 7.9. 	any method of estimating the age of fossils that provides an approximate age in years	6.f
An embryo is an organism in the earliest stages of development. Embryos of different species may look quite similar, even when the adult forms look very different. Look at the drawings of embryos in Figure 7.12. They represent very early life stages of a chicken, turtle, pig, and human being. The embryos look so similar that its hard to tell them apart. Such similarities provide evidence that all four types of animals are related. They help document that evolution has occurred. 	very early stage of development of an organism	7.d
Individuals dont evolve. Their alleles dont change over time. The unit of microevolution is the population. 	all the genes in all the members of a population	1.g
There are four major forces of evolution that cause allele frequencies to change. They are mutation, gene flow, genetic drift, and natural selection. Mutation creates new genetic variation in a gene pool This is how all new alleles first arise. Its the ultimate source of new genetic variation, so it is essential for evolution. However, for any given gene, the chance of a mutation occurring is very small. Therefore, mutation alone does not have much effect on allele frequencies. Gene flow is the movement of genes into or out of a gene pool It occurs when individuals migrate into or out of the population. How much gene flow changes allele frequencies depends on how many migrants there are and their genotypes. Genetic drift is a random change in allele frequencies. It occurs in small populations. Allele frequencies in the offspring may differ by chance from those in the parents. This is like tossing a coin just a few times. You may, by chance, get more or less than the expected 50 percent heads or tails. In the same way, you may get more or less than the expected allele frequencies in the small number of individuals in the next generation. The smaller the population is, the more allele frequencies may drift. Natural selection is a change in allele frequencies that occurs because some genotypes are more fit than others. Genotypes with greater fitness produce more offspring and pass more copies of their alleles to the next generation. This is the force of evolution that Darwin identified. Figure 23.12 shows how Darwin thought natural selection led to variation in finches on the Galpagos Islands. 	random change in a small populations allele frequencies	2.f
Individuals dont evolve. Their alleles dont change over time. The unit of microevolution is the population. 	process in which two species evolve the same traits because they live in similar habitats	3.d
There are four major forces of evolution that cause allele frequencies to change. They are mutation, gene flow, genetic drift, and natural selection. Mutation creates new genetic variation in a gene pool This is how all new alleles first arise. Its the ultimate source of new genetic variation, so it is essential for evolution. However, for any given gene, the chance of a mutation occurring is very small. Therefore, mutation alone does not have much effect on allele frequencies. Gene flow is the movement of genes into or out of a gene pool It occurs when individuals migrate into or out of the population. How much gene flow changes allele frequencies depends on how many migrants there are and their genotypes. Genetic drift is a random change in allele frequencies. It occurs in small populations. Allele frequencies in the offspring may differ by chance from those in the parents. This is like tossing a coin just a few times. You may, by chance, get more or less than the expected 50 percent heads or tails. In the same way, you may get more or less than the expected allele frequencies in the small number of individuals in the next generation. The smaller the population is, the more allele frequencies may drift. Natural selection is a change in allele frequencies that occurs because some genotypes are more fit than others. Genotypes with greater fitness produce more offspring and pass more copies of their alleles to the next generation. This is the force of evolution that Darwin identified. Figure 23.12 shows how Darwin thought natural selection led to variation in finches on the Galpagos Islands. 	change in allele frequencies that occurs because some genotypes are more fit than others	4.e
Individuals dont evolve. Their alleles dont change over time. The unit of microevolution is the population. 	number of copies of an allele divided by the total number of alleles for the gene in a gene pool	5.b
What happens when forces of evolution work over a long period of time? The answer is macroevolution. An example is the evolution of a new species. 	group of organisms of the same species that live in the same area	6.a
Individuals dont evolve. Their alleles dont change over time. The unit of microevolution is the population. 	movement of genes into or out of a population	7.c
We now know how variation in traits is inherited. Variation in traits is controlled by different alleles for genes. Alleles, in turn, are passed to gametes and then to offspring. Evolution occurs because of changes in alleles over time. How long a time? That depends on the time scale of evolution you consider. Evolution that occurs over a short period of time is known as microevolution. It might take place in just a couple of generations. This scale of evolution occurs at the level of the population. The Grants observed evolution at this scale in populations of Darwins finches. Beak size in finch populations changed in just two years because of a serious drought. Evolution that occurs over a long period of time is called macroevolution. It might take place over millions of years. This scale of evolution occurs above the level of the species. Fossils provide evidence for evolution at this scale. The evolution of the horse family, shown in Figure 7.13, is an example of macroevolution. 	darwin knew mendels laws so he understood how traits are inherited	false
The evolution of a new species is called speciation. A species is a group of organisms that can mate and produce fertile offspring together but not with members of other such groups. What must happen for a new species to arise? Some members of an existing species must change so they can no produce fertile offspring with the rest of the species. Speciation often occurs when some members of a species break off from the rest. The splinter group evolves in isolation from the original species. The original species also continues to evolve. Sooner or later, the splinter group becomes too different to breed with members of the original species. At that point, a new species has formed. A good example of speciation involves anole lizards, like the one pictured in Figure 7.15. There are about 150 different species of anole lizards in the Caribbean Islands. Scientists think that a single species of lizard first colonized one of the islands about 50 million years ago. A few lizards from this original species eventually reached each of the other islands, where they evolved in isolation. Anoles in different habitats evolved traits that affected mating. For example, they evolved skin flaps of different colors. Females didnt respond to male anoles with the wrong color skin flap. This prevented them from mating. Eventually, all the different species of anoles known today evolved. Watch this interesting video to learn more about anole speciation in the Caribbean: 	horses became smaller as they evolved over the past 50 million years	false
Individuals dont evolve. Their alleles dont change over time. The unit of microevolution is the population. 	microevolution can be measured by changes in allele frequencies	true
Darwin thought that evolution occurs very slowly. This is likely if conditions are stable. But what if conditions are changing rapidly? Evolution is likely to occur more rapidly as well. For example, the Grants showed that evolution occurred in just a couple of years in Darwins finches. This happened when a severe drought killed off a lot of the plants that the birds needed for food. Millions of fossils have been found since Darwins time. They show that evolution may occur in fits and starts. Long period of little or gradual change may be interrupted by bursts of rapid change. The rate of evolution is influenced by how the environment is changing. Today, Earths climate is changing rapidly. How do you think this might affect the rate of evolution? 	a total of 300 fossils have been discovered since darwins time	false
What happens when forces of evolution work over a long period of time? The answer is macroevolution. An example is the evolution of a new species. 	once a new species forms it stops evolving	false
Individuals dont evolve. Their alleles dont change over time. The unit of microevolution is the population. 	it takes millions of years for microevolution to occur	false
Individuals dont evolve. Their alleles dont change over time. The unit of microevolution is the population. 	individuals can evolve if their allele frequencies change	false
What happens when forces of evolution work over a long period of time? The answer is macroevolution. An example is the evolution of a new species. 	the evolution the grants observed in finches was macroevolution	false
Individuals dont evolve. Their alleles dont change over time. The unit of microevolution is the population. 	population size determines how quickly allele frequencies change by genetic drift	true
A population is a group of organisms of the same species that live in the same area. All the genes in all the members of a population make up the populations gene pool. For each gene, the gene pool includes all the different alleles in the population. The gene pool can be described by its allele frequencies for specific genes. The frequency of an allele is the number of copies of that allele divided by the total number of alleles for the gene in the gene pool. A simple example will help you understand these concepts. The data in Table 7.2 represent a population of 100 individuals. For each gene, the gene pool has a total of 200 alleles (2 per individual x 100 individuals). The gene in question exists as two different alleles, A and a. The number of A alleles in the gene pool is 140. Of these, 100 are in the 50 AA homozygotes. Another 40 are in the 40 Aa heterozygotes. The number of a alleles in the gene pool is 60. Of these, 40 are in the 40 Aa heterozygotes. Another 20 are in the 10 aa homozygotes. The frequency of the A allele is 140/200 = 0.7. The frequency of the a allele is 60/200 = 0.3. Genotype AA Aa aa Totals Number of Individuals 50 40 10 100 Number of A Alleles 100 (50 x 2) 40 (40 x 1) 0 (10 x 0) 140 Number of a Alleles 0 (50 x 0) 40 (40 x 1) 20 (10 x 2) 60 Evolution occurs in a population when its allele frequencies change over time. For example, the frequency of the A allele might change from 0.7 to 0.8. If that happens, evolution has occurred. What causes allele frequencies to change? The answer is forces of evolution. 	a gene pool is described by its allele frequencies	true
What happens when forces of evolution work over a long period of time? The answer is macroevolution. An example is the evolution of a new species. 	darwin thought that evolution occurs very quickly	false
What happens when forces of evolution work over a long period of time? The answer is macroevolution. An example is the evolution of a new species. 	mutation alone can cause rapid evolution	false
Its hard to grasp the vast amounts of time since Earth formed and life first appeared. It may help to think of Earths history as a 24-hour day. 	major division of earths history that is known as the age of dinosaurs	1.e
Its hard to grasp the vast amounts of time since Earth formed and life first appeared. It may help to think of Earths history as a 24-hour day. 	first major division of earths history	2.b
Its hard to grasp the vast amounts of time since Earth formed and life first appeared. It may help to think of Earths history as a 24-hour day. 	major division of earths history that is called the age of mammals	3.c
At the end of the Precambrian, a mass extinction occurred. In a mass extinction, the majority of species die out. The Precambrian mass extinction was the first of six mass extinctions that occurred on Earth. Its not certain what caused this first mass extinction. Changes in Earths geology and climate were no doubt involved. 	event in which the majority of earths species die out	4.f
The Triassic mass extinction gave dinosaurs the opportunity to really flourish during the Jurassic Period. Thats why this period is called the golden age of dinosaurs. The earliest birds also evolved during the Jurassic from dinosaur ancestors. In addition, all the major groups of mammals appeared. Flowering plants also appeared for the first time. New insects evolved to pollinate them. The continents continued to move apart. 	the jurassic period is called the golden age of dinosaurs	true
The extinction of the dinosaurs at the end of the Mesozoic Era paved the way for mammals to take over. Thats why the Cenozoic Era is called the age of mammals. They soon became the dominant land animals on Earth. The Cenozoic is divided into two periods. 	mammals became the dominant land animals during the mesozoic era	false
Another tool for understanding the history of Earth and its life is the geologic time scale. You can see this time scale in Figure 7.18. It divides Earths history into eons, eras, and periods. These divisions are based on major changes in geology, climate, and the evolution of life. The geologic time scale organizes Earths history on the basis of important events instead of time alone. It also puts more focus on recent events, about which we know the most. 	division of earths history into eons eras and periods	5.g
During the Quaternary Period, the climate cooled. This caused a series of ice ages. Glaciers advanced southward from the North Pole. They reached as far south as Chicago and New York City. Sea levels fell because so much water was frozen in glaciers. This exposed land bridges between continents. The land bridges allowed land animals to move to new areas. Some mammals adapted to the cold by evolving very large size and thick fur. An example is the woolly mammoth, shown in Figure 7.25. Other mammals moved closer to the equator. Those that couldnt adapt or move went extinct, along with many plants. The last ice age ended about 12,000 years ago. By then, our own species, Homo sapiens, had evolved. After that, we were eyewitnesses to the story of life. As a result, the recent past is less of a mystery than the billions of years before it. 	the last ice age ended about 12 million years ago	false
Its hard to grasp the vast amounts of time since Earth formed and life first appeared. It may help to think of Earths history as a 24-hour day. 	major division of earths history that began with the cambrian explosion	6.a
Its hard to grasp the vast amounts of time since Earth formed and life first appeared. It may help to think of Earths history as a 24-hour day. 	single cell believed to have given rise to all of the following life on earth	7.d
The extinction of the dinosaurs at the end of the Mesozoic Era paved the way for mammals to take over. Thats why the Cenozoic Era is called the age of mammals. They soon became the dominant land animals on Earth. The Cenozoic is divided into two periods. 	the current geological era is the cenozoic era	true
Its hard to grasp the vast amounts of time since Earth formed and life first appeared. It may help to think of Earths history as a 24-hour day. 	when earth first formed it had oceans but no atmosphere	false
Its hard to grasp the vast amounts of time since Earth formed and life first appeared. It may help to think of Earths history as a 24-hour day. 	during earths history continents drifted and collided	true
Its hard to grasp the vast amounts of time since Earth formed and life first appeared. It may help to think of Earths history as a 24-hour day. 	if earths history is represented by a 24hour day humans appear at about 800 pm	false
Its hard to grasp the vast amounts of time since Earth formed and life first appeared. It may help to think of Earths history as a 24-hour day. 	earths earliest atmosphere contained more oxygen than the atmosphere does today	false
At the end of the Precambrian, a mass extinction occurred. In a mass extinction, the majority of species die out. The Precambrian mass extinction was the first of six mass extinctions that occurred on Earth. Its not certain what caused this first mass extinction. Changes in Earths geology and climate were no doubt involved. 	a total of four mass extinctions have occurred on earth since life began	false
The Paleozoic Era lasted from 544 to 245 million years ago. It is divided into six periods. 	fish first evolved during the paleozoic era	true
The Triassic mass extinction gave dinosaurs the opportunity to really flourish during the Jurassic Period. Thats why this period is called the golden age of dinosaurs. The earliest birds also evolved during the Jurassic from dinosaur ancestors. In addition, all the major groups of mammals appeared. Flowering plants also appeared for the first time. New insects evolved to pollinate them. The continents continued to move apart. 	the jurassic period is known as the golden age of mammals	false
The Permian mass extinction paved the way for another burst of new life at the start of the Mesozoic Era. This era is known as the age of dinosaurs. It is divided into three periods. 	the extinction of the dinosaurs paved the way for reptiles to take over	false
Bacteria are the most diverse organisms on Earth. Thousands of species of bacteria have been discovered. Many more are thought to exist. The known species are classified on the basis of various traits. For example, they may be classified by the shape of their cells. They may also be classified by how they react to a dye called Gram stain. 	a spiralshaped bacterium is classified as a spirillus	true
Bacteria are the most diverse organisms on Earth. Thousands of species of bacteria have been discovered. Many more are thought to exist. The known species are classified on the basis of various traits. For example, they may be classified by the shape of their cells. They may also be classified by how they react to a dye called Gram stain. 	bacteria that form biofilms are multicellular prokaryotes	false
Bacteria are the most abundant living things on Earth. They live in almost all environments. They are found in the air, ocean, soil, and intestines of animals. They are even found in rocks deep below Earths surface. Any surface that has not been sterilized is likely to be covered with bacteria. The total number of bacteria in the world is amazing. Its estimated to be about 5 million trillion trillion. If you write that number in digits, it has 30 zeroes! 	bacteria cover earths surface but are not found far below it	false
Bacteria are the most diverse organisms on Earth. Thousands of species of bacteria have been discovered. Many more are thought to exist. The known species are classified on the basis of various traits. For example, they may be classified by the shape of their cells. They may also be classified by how they react to a dye called Gram stain. 	there are more bacteria than any other organisms on earth	true
Bacteria are the most diverse organisms on Earth. Thousands of species of bacteria have been discovered. Many more are thought to exist. The known species are classified on the basis of various traits. For example, they may be classified by the shape of their cells. They may also be classified by how they react to a dye called Gram stain. 	yogurt is made with the help of bacteria	true
Bacteria are the most abundant living things on Earth. They live in almost all environments. They are found in the air, ocean, soil, and intestines of animals. They are even found in rocks deep below Earths surface. Any surface that has not been sterilized is likely to be covered with bacteria. The total number of bacteria in the world is amazing. Its estimated to be about 5 million trillion trillion. If you write that number in digits, it has 30 zeroes! 	a book lying on your desk is likely to be covered with bacteria	true
Bacteria are the most diverse organisms on Earth. Thousands of species of bacteria have been discovered. Many more are thought to exist. The known species are classified on the basis of various traits. For example, they may be classified by the shape of their cells. They may also be classified by how they react to a dye called Gram stain. 	bacteria are the most diverse organisms on earth	true
Different types of bacteria stain a different color when Gram stain is applied to them. This makes them easy to identify. Some stain purple and some stain red, as you can see in Figure 8.11. The two types differ in their outer layers. This explains why they stain differently. Bacteria that stain purple are called gram-positive bacteria. They have a thick cell wall without an outer membrane. Bacteria that stain red are called gram-negative bacteria. They have a thin cell wall with an outer membrane. 	bacteria stain differently with gram stain depending on whether they have a cell nucleus	false
Bacteria are the most diverse organisms on Earth. Thousands of species of bacteria have been discovered. Many more are thought to exist. The known species are classified on the basis of various traits. For example, they may be classified by the shape of their cells. They may also be classified by how they react to a dye called Gram stain. 	all bacteria cause human illnesses	false
Bacteria are the most diverse organisms on Earth. Thousands of species of bacteria have been discovered. Many more are thought to exist. The known species are classified on the basis of various traits. For example, they may be classified by the shape of their cells. They may also be classified by how they react to a dye called Gram stain. 	some bacteria can be used as pesticides	true
Bacteria are the most diverse organisms on Earth. Thousands of species of bacteria have been discovered. Many more are thought to exist. The known species are classified on the basis of various traits. For example, they may be classified by the shape of their cells. They may also be classified by how they react to a dye called Gram stain. 	pickles and cheese on a cheeseburger are both made with the help of bacteria	true
You have ten times as many bacterial cells as human cells in your body. Luckily for you, most of these bacteria are harmless. However, some of them can cause disease. Any organism that causes disease is called a pathogen. Diseases caused by bacterial pathogens include food poisoning, strep throat, and Lyme disease. Bacteria that cause disease may spread directly from person to person. For example, they may spread when people shake hands with, or sneeze on, other people. Bacteria may also spread through food, water, or objects that have become contaminated with them. Some bacteria are spread by vectors. A vector is an organism that spreads bacteria or other pathogens. Most vectors are animals, commonly insects. For example, deer ticks like the one in Figure 8.13 spread Lyme disease. Ticks carry Lyme disease bacteria from deer to people when they bite them. 	strep throat is a bacterial infection	true
Bacteria are the most abundant living things on Earth. They live in almost all environments. They are found in the air, ocean, soil, and intestines of animals. They are even found in rocks deep below Earths surface. Any surface that has not been sterilized is likely to be covered with bacteria. The total number of bacteria in the world is amazing. Its estimated to be about 5 million trillion trillion. If you write that number in digits, it has 30 zeroes! 	sphereshaped bacterium	1.f
You have ten times as many bacterial cells as human cells in your body. Luckily for you, most of these bacteria are harmless. However, some of them can cause disease. Any organism that causes disease is called a pathogen. Diseases caused by bacterial pathogens include food poisoning, strep throat, and Lyme disease. Bacteria that cause disease may spread directly from person to person. For example, they may spread when people shake hands with, or sneeze on, other people. Bacteria may also spread through food, water, or objects that have become contaminated with them. Some bacteria are spread by vectors. A vector is an organism that spreads bacteria or other pathogens. Most vectors are animals, commonly insects. For example, deer ticks like the one in Figure 8.13 spread Lyme disease. Ticks carry Lyme disease bacteria from deer to people when they bite them. 	organism that spreads pathogens from host to host	2.c
Bacteria are the most diverse organisms on Earth. Thousands of species of bacteria have been discovered. Many more are thought to exist. The known species are classified on the basis of various traits. For example, they may be classified by the shape of their cells. They may also be classified by how they react to a dye called Gram stain. 	name of the dye used to color bacteria	3.a
Bacteria are the most abundant living things on Earth. They live in almost all environments. They are found in the air, ocean, soil, and intestines of animals. They are even found in rocks deep below Earths surface. Any surface that has not been sterilized is likely to be covered with bacteria. The total number of bacteria in the world is amazing. Its estimated to be about 5 million trillion trillion. If you write that number in digits, it has 30 zeroes! 	rodshaped bacterium	4.d
Bacteria in food or water usually can be killed by heating it to a high temperature. Generally, this temperature is at least 71 C (160 F). Bacteria on surfaces such as countertops and floors can be killed with disinfectants, such as chlorine bleach. Bacterial infections in people can be treated with antibiotic drugs. These drugs kill bacteria and may quickly cure the disease. If youve ever had strep throat, you were probably prescribed an antibiotic to treat it. Some bacteria have developed antibiotic resistance. They have evolved traits that make them resistant to one or more antibiotic drugs. You can see how this happens in Figure 8.14. Its an example of natural selection. Some bacteria are now resistant to most common antibiotic drugs. These infections are very hard to treat. 	type of drug used to treat bacterial infections	5.g
You have ten times as many bacterial cells as human cells in your body. Luckily for you, most of these bacteria are harmless. However, some of them can cause disease. Any organism that causes disease is called a pathogen. Diseases caused by bacterial pathogens include food poisoning, strep throat, and Lyme disease. Bacteria that cause disease may spread directly from person to person. For example, they may spread when people shake hands with, or sneeze on, other people. Bacteria may also spread through food, water, or objects that have become contaminated with them. Some bacteria are spread by vectors. A vector is an organism that spreads bacteria or other pathogens. Most vectors are animals, commonly insects. For example, deer ticks like the one in Figure 8.13 spread Lyme disease. Ticks carry Lyme disease bacteria from deer to people when they bite them. 	organism that causes disease	6.e
Bacteria are the most abundant living things on Earth. They live in almost all environments. They are found in the air, ocean, soil, and intestines of animals. They are even found in rocks deep below Earths surface. Any surface that has not been sterilized is likely to be covered with bacteria. The total number of bacteria in the world is amazing. Its estimated to be about 5 million trillion trillion. If you write that number in digits, it has 30 zeroes! 	spiralshaped bacterium	7.b
When is a person considered an adult? That depends. Most teens become physically mature by the age of 16 or so. But they are not adults in a legal sense until they are older. For example, in the U.S., you must be 18 to vote. Once adulthood begins, it can be divided into three stages: (1) early, (2) middle, and (3) late adulthood. 	early adulthood begins at age 16	false
When is a person considered an adult? That depends. Most teens become physically mature by the age of 16 or so. But they are not adults in a legal sense until they are older. For example, in the U.S., you must be 18 to vote. Once adulthood begins, it can be divided into three stages: (1) early, (2) middle, and (3) late adulthood. 	late adulthood begins around age 65	true
Aquatic biomes in the ocean are called marine biomes. Organisms that live in marine biomes must be adapted to the salt in the water. For example, many have organs for excreting excess salt. Marine biomes include the oceans, coral reefs, and estuaries ( Figure 1.1). The oceans are the largest of all the ecosystems. They can be divided into four separate zones based on the amount of sunlight. Ocean zones are also divided based on their depth and their distance from land. Each zone has a great diversity of species. Within a coral reef, the dominant organisms are corals. Corals consist partially of algae, which provide nutrients via photosynthesis. Corals also extend tentacles to obtain plankton from the water. Coral reefs include several species of microorganisms, invertebrates, fishes, sea urchins, octopuses, and sea stars. Estuaries are areas where freshwater streams or rivers merge with the ocean. An example of a marine biome, a kelp for- est, from Anacapa Island in the Channel Islands National Marine Sanctuary. 	aquatic biomes in the ocean are called marine biomes	true
Recall that terrestrial biomes are defined by their climate. Thats because plants and animals are adapted for certain amounts of temperature and moisture. However, would aquatic biomes be classified in the same way? No, that wouldnt make much senseall parts of an aquatic environment have plenty of water. Aquatic biomes can be generally classified based on the amount of salt in the water. Freshwater biomes have less than 1% salt and are typical of ponds and lakes, streams and rivers, and wetlands. Marine biomes have more salt and are characteristic of the oceans, coral reefs, and estuaries. Most aquatic organisms do not have to deal with extremes of temperature or moisture. Instead, their main limiting factors are the availability of sunlight and the concentration of dissolved oxygen and nutrients in the water. 	wetlands may be either freshwater or salt water biomes	false
The immune system usually protects you from pathogens and other causes of disease. When the immune system is working properly, it keeps you from getting sick. But the immune system is like any other system of the body. It can break down or develop diseases. AIDS is an infectious disease of the immune system caused by a virus. Some diseases of the immune system are noninfectious. They include autoimmune diseases and allergies. 	aids is an autoimmune disease	false
An allergy occurs when the immune system attacks a harmless substance that enters the body from the outside. A substance that causes an allergy is called an allergen. It is the immune system, not the allergen, that causes the symptoms of an allergy. Did you ever hear of hay fever? Its not really a fever at all. Its an allergy to plant pollens. People with this type of allergy have symptoms such as watery eyes, sneezing, and a runny nose. A common cause of hay fever is the pollen of ragweed. Many people are also allergic to poison ivy ( Figure 1.2). Skin contact with poison ivy leads to an itchy rash in people who are allergic to the plant. Ragweed is a common roadside weed found throughout the United States. Many people are allergic to its pollen. Some people are allergic to certain foods. Nuts and shellfish are common causes of food allergies. Other common causes of allergies include: Drugs, such as penicillin. Mold. Dust. The dead skin cells of dogs and cats, called dander. Stings of wasps and bees. Most allergies can be treated with medicines. Medicines used to treat allergies include antihistamines and corticos- teroids. These medicines help control the immune system when it attacks an allergen. Sometimes, allergies cause severe symptoms, a condition known as anaphylaxis. For example, they may cause the throat to swell so it is hard to breathe. Severe allergies may be life threatening. They require emergency medical care. 	people can die from an allergic reaction	true
Your large intestine is not just made up of cells. It is also an ecosystem, home to trillions of bacteria known as the "gut flora" ( Figure 1.1). But dont worry, most of these bacteria are helpful. Friendly bacteria live mostly in the large intestine and part of the small intestine. The acidic environment of the stomach does not allow bacterial growth. Gut bacteria have several roles in the body. For example, intestinal bacteria: Produce vitamin B12 and vitamin K. Control the growth of harmful bacteria. Break down poisons in the large intestine. Break down some substances in food that cannot be digested, such as fiber and some starches and sugars. Bacteria produce enzymes that digest carbohydrates in plant cell walls. Most of the nutritional value of plant material would be wasted without these bacteria. These help us digest plant foods like spinach. Your intestines are home to trillions of bacteria. A wide range of friendly bacteria live in the gut. Bacteria begin to populate the human digestive system right after birth. Gut bacteria include Lactobacillus, the bacteria commonly used in probiotic foods such as yogurt, and E. coli bacteria. About a third of all bacteria in the gut are members of the Bacteroides species. Bacteroides are key in helping us digest plant food. It is estimated that 100 trillion bacteria live in the gut. This is more than the human cells that make up you. It has also been estimated that there are more bacteria in your mouth than people on the planet. There are over 7 billion people on the planet. The bacteria in your digestive system are from anywhere between 300 and 1000 species. As these bacteria are helpful, your body does not attack them. They actually appear to the bodys immune system as cells of the digestive system, not foreign invaders. The bacteria actually cover themselves with sugar molecules removed from the actual cells of the digestive system. This disguises the bacteria and protects them from the immune system. As the bacteria that live in the human gut are beneficial to us, and as the bacteria enjoy a safe environment to live, the relationship that we have with these tiny organisms is described as mutualism, a type of symbiotic relationship. Lastly, keep in mind the small size of bacteria. Together, all the bacteria in your gut may weight just about 2 pounds. 	there are more bacterial cells in your body than human cells	true
Your large intestine is not just made up of cells. It is also an ecosystem, home to trillions of bacteria known as the "gut flora" ( Figure 1.1). But dont worry, most of these bacteria are helpful. Friendly bacteria live mostly in the large intestine and part of the small intestine. The acidic environment of the stomach does not allow bacterial growth. Gut bacteria have several roles in the body. For example, intestinal bacteria: Produce vitamin B12 and vitamin K. Control the growth of harmful bacteria. Break down poisons in the large intestine. Break down some substances in food that cannot be digested, such as fiber and some starches and sugars. Bacteria produce enzymes that digest carbohydrates in plant cell walls. Most of the nutritional value of plant material would be wasted without these bacteria. These help us digest plant foods like spinach. Your intestines are home to trillions of bacteria. A wide range of friendly bacteria live in the gut. Bacteria begin to populate the human digestive system right after birth. Gut bacteria include Lactobacillus, the bacteria commonly used in probiotic foods such as yogurt, and E. coli bacteria. About a third of all bacteria in the gut are members of the Bacteroides species. Bacteroides are key in helping us digest plant food. It is estimated that 100 trillion bacteria live in the gut. This is more than the human cells that make up you. It has also been estimated that there are more bacteria in your mouth than people on the planet. There are over 7 billion people on the planet. The bacteria in your digestive system are from anywhere between 300 and 1000 species. As these bacteria are helpful, your body does not attack them. They actually appear to the bodys immune system as cells of the digestive system, not foreign invaders. The bacteria actually cover themselves with sugar molecules removed from the actual cells of the digestive system. This disguises the bacteria and protects them from the immune system. As the bacteria that live in the human gut are beneficial to us, and as the bacteria enjoy a safe environment to live, the relationship that we have with these tiny organisms is described as mutualism, a type of symbiotic relationship. Lastly, keep in mind the small size of bacteria. Together, all the bacteria in your gut may weight just about 2 pounds. 	there could be as many as 1000 species of bacteria in your digestive system	true
Like all organisms, bacteria need energy, and they can acquire this energy through a number of different ways. 	photosynthetic bacteria evolved before photosynthetic plants	true
Like all organisms, bacteria need energy, and they can acquire this energy through a number of different ways. 	mutualistic bacteria kill their prey	false
You are not aware of them, but your skin is covered by millions (or more!) of bacteria. Millions more live inside your body. Most of these bacteria help defend your body from pathogens. How do they do it? They compete with harmful bacteria for food and space. This prevents the harmful bacteria from multiplying and making you sick. 	the first line of defense keeps most pathogens out of the body	true
You are not aware of them, but your skin is covered by millions (or more!) of bacteria. Millions more live inside your body. Most of these bacteria help defend your body from pathogens. How do they do it? They compete with harmful bacteria for food and space. This prevents the harmful bacteria from multiplying and making you sick. 	the skin is a mucous membrane	false
The second most important blood group system in human blood is the Rhesus (Rh) factor. A person either has, or does not have, the Rh antigen on the surface of their RBCs. If they do have it, then the person is positive. If the person does not have the antigen, they are considered negative. 	blood type is based on what is on the surface of a red blood cell	true
The second most important blood group system in human blood is the Rhesus (Rh) factor. A person either has, or does not have, the Rh antigen on the surface of their RBCs. If they do have it, then the person is positive. If the person does not have the antigen, they are considered negative. 	markers inside a red blood cell can trigger an immune response	false
The blood vessels are an important part of the cardiovascular system. They connect the heart to every cell in the body. Arteries carry blood away from the heart, while veins return blood to the heart ( Figure 1.1). The right side of the heart pumps de- oxygenated blood into pulmonary circula- tion, while the left side pumps oxygenated blood into systemic circulation. 	arteries return bloodrich oxygen to the heart	false
The blood vessels are an important part of the cardiovascular system. They connect the heart to every cell in the body. Arteries carry blood away from the heart, while veins return blood to the heart ( Figure 1.1). The right side of the heart pumps de- oxygenated blood into pulmonary circula- tion, while the left side pumps oxygenated blood into systemic circulation. 	all arteries carry oxygenrich blood	false
Most vertebrates are ray-finned fish, with close to 27,000 known species. By comparison, there are "only" about 10,000 species of birds. The ray-finned fish have fin rays, with fins supported by bony spines known as rays. The ray-finned fish are the dominant class of vertebrates, with nearly 99% of fish falling into this category. They live in all aquatic environments, from freshwater and marine environments from the deep sea to the highest mountain streams. 	most vertebrates are bony fish	true
There are about 27,000 species of bony fish ( Figure 1.1), which are divided into two classes: ray-finned fish and lobe-finned fish. Most bony fish are ray-finned. These thin fins consist of webs of skin over flexible spines. Lobe- finned fish, on the other hand, have fins that resemble stump-like appendages. Fins of bony fish: ray fin (left) and lobe fin (right). 	the lobefinned fish have fins that seem like appendages	true
Cancer is a disease that causes cells to divide out of control. Normally, the body has systems that prevent cells from dividing out of control. But in the case of cancer, these systems fail. Cancer is usually caused by mutations. Mutations are random errors in genes. Mutations that lead to cancer usually happen to genes that control the cell cycle. Because of the mutations, abnormal cells divide uncontrollably. This often leads to the development of a tumor. A tumor is a mass of abnormal tissue. As a tumor grows, it may harm normal tissues around it. Anything that can cause cancer is called a carcinogen. Carcinogens may be pathogens, chemicals, or radiation. 	cancer is a disease of uncontrolled cell division	true
Pathogens that cause cancer include the human papilloma virus (HPV) ( Figure 1.1) and the hepatitis B virus. HPV is spread through sexual contact. It can cause cancer of the reproductive system in females. The hepatitis B virus is spread through sexual contact or contact with blood containing the virus. It can cause cancer of the liver. 	any mutation can lead to cancer	false
Atherosclerosis in the arteries of the brain can also lead to a stroke. A stroke is a loss of brain function due to a blockage of the blood supply to the brain. Risk factors for stroke include old age, high blood pressure, having a previous stroke, diabetes, high cholesterol, and smoking. The best way to reduce the risk of stroke is to have low blood pressure. 	the heart has coronary arteries that supply it with oxygen	true
Like any other muscle, your heart needs oxygen. Hearts have arteries that provide oxygen through the blood. They are known as coronary arteries. Coronary heart disease is the end result of the buildup of plaque within the walls of the coronary arteries. Coronary heart disease often does not have any symptoms. A symptom of coronary heart disease is chest pain. Occasional chest pain can happen during times of stress or physical activity. The pain of angina means the heart muscle fibers need more oxygen than they are getting. Most people with coronary heart disease often have no symptoms for many years until they have a heart attack. A heart attack happens when the blood cannot reach the heart because a blood vessel is blocked. If cardiac muscle is starved of oxygen for more than roughly five minutes, it will die. Cardiac muscle cells cannot be replaced, so once they die, they are dead forever. Coronary heart disease is the leading cause of death of adults in the United States. The image below shows the way in which a blocked coronary artery can cause a heart attack and cause part of the heart muscle to die ( Figure 1.2). Maybe one day stem cells will be used to replace dead cardiac muscle cells. 	currently dead cardiac muscle cannot be replaced	true
Your cardiovascular system has many jobs. At times the cardiovascular system can work like a pump, a heating system, or even a postal carrier. To do these tasks, your cardiovascular system works with other organ systems, such as the respiratory, endocrine, and nervous systems. The cardiovascular system (Figure 1.1) is made up of the heart, the blood vessels, and the blood. It moves nutrients, gases (like oxygen), and wastes to and from your cells. Every cell in your body depends on your cardiovascular system. If your cells dont receive nutrients, they cannot survive. The main function of the cardiovascular system is to deliver oxygen to each of your cells. Blood receives oxygen in your lungs (the main organs of the respiratory system) and then is pumped, by your heart, throughout your body. The oxygen then diffuses into your cells, and carbon dioxide, a waste product of cellular respiration, moves from your cells into your blood to be delivered back to your lungs and exhaled. Each cell in your body needs oxygen, as oxygen is used in cellular respiration to produce energy in the form of ATP. Without oxygen, lactic acid fermentation would occur in your cells, which can only be maintained for a brief period of time. Arteries carry blood full of oxygen ("oxygen-rich") away from the heart and veins return oxygen-poor blood back to the heart. The cardiovascular system also plays a role in maintaining body temperature. It helps to keep you warm by moving warm blood around your body. Your blood vessels also control your body temperature to keep you from getting too hot or too cold. When your brain senses that your body temperature is increasing, it sends messages to the blood vessels in the skin to increase in diameter. Increasing the diameter of the blood vessels increases the amount of blood and heat that moves near the skins surface. The heat is then released from the skin. This helps you cool down. What do you think your blood vessels do when your body temperature is decreasing? The blood also carries hormones, which are chemical messenger molecules produced by organs of the endocrine system, through your body. Hormones are produced in one area of your body and have an effect on another area. To get to that other area, they must travel through your blood. An example is the hormone adrenaline, produced by the adrenal glands on top of the kidneys. Adrenaline has multiple effects on the heart (it quickens the heart rate), on muscles and on the airway. 	hormones travel around your body in your blood	true
Your cardiovascular system has many jobs. At times the cardiovascular system can work like a pump, a heating system, or even a postal carrier. To do these tasks, your cardiovascular system works with other organ systems, such as the respiratory, endocrine, and nervous systems. The cardiovascular system (Figure 1.1) is made up of the heart, the blood vessels, and the blood. It moves nutrients, gases (like oxygen), and wastes to and from your cells. Every cell in your body depends on your cardiovascular system. If your cells dont receive nutrients, they cannot survive. The main function of the cardiovascular system is to deliver oxygen to each of your cells. Blood receives oxygen in your lungs (the main organs of the respiratory system) and then is pumped, by your heart, throughout your body. The oxygen then diffuses into your cells, and carbon dioxide, a waste product of cellular respiration, moves from your cells into your blood to be delivered back to your lungs and exhaled. Each cell in your body needs oxygen, as oxygen is used in cellular respiration to produce energy in the form of ATP. Without oxygen, lactic acid fermentation would occur in your cells, which can only be maintained for a brief period of time. Arteries carry blood full of oxygen ("oxygen-rich") away from the heart and veins return oxygen-poor blood back to the heart. The cardiovascular system also plays a role in maintaining body temperature. It helps to keep you warm by moving warm blood around your body. Your blood vessels also control your body temperature to keep you from getting too hot or too cold. When your brain senses that your body temperature is increasing, it sends messages to the blood vessels in the skin to increase in diameter. Increasing the diameter of the blood vessels increases the amount of blood and heat that moves near the skins surface. The heat is then released from the skin. This helps you cool down. What do you think your blood vessels do when your body temperature is decreasing? The blood also carries hormones, which are chemical messenger molecules produced by organs of the endocrine system, through your body. Hormones are produced in one area of your body and have an effect on another area. To get to that other area, they must travel through your blood. An example is the hormone adrenaline, produced by the adrenal glands on top of the kidneys. Adrenaline has multiple effects on the heart (it quickens the heart rate), on muscles and on the airway. 	the cardiovascular system removes oxygen from your cells	false
There are many risk factors that can cause a person to develop cardiovascular disease. A risk factor is anything that is linked to an increased chance of developing a disease. Some of the risk factors for cardiovascular disease you cannot control, but there are many risk factors you can control. Risk factors you cannot control include: Age: The older a person is, the greater their chance of developing a cardiovascular disease. Gender: Men under age 64 are much more likely to die of coronary heart disease than women, although the gender difference decreases with age. Genetics: Family history of cardiovascular disease increases a persons chance of developing heart disease. Risk factors you can control include many lifestyle factors: Tobacco smoking: Giving up smoking or never starting to smoke is the best way to reduce the risk of heart disease. Diabetes: Diabetes can cause bodily changes, such as high cholesterol levels, which are are risk factors for cardiovascular disease. High cholesterol levels: High amounts of "bad cholesterol," increase the risk of cardiovascular disease. Obesity: Having a very high percentage of body fat, especially if the fat is mostly found in the upper body, rather than the hips and thighs, increases risk significantly. High blood pressure: If the heart and blood vessels have to work harder than normal, this puts the cardiovas- cular system under a strain. Lack of physical activity: Aerobic activities, such as the one pictured below ( Figure 1.1), help keep your heart healthy. To reduce the risk of disease, you should be active for at least 60 minutes a day, five days a week. Poor eating habits: Eating mostly foods that do not have many nutrients other than fat or carbohydrate leads to high cholesterol levels, obesity, and cardiovascular disease ( Figure 1.2). 60 minutes a day of vigorous aerobic activity, such as basketball, is enough to help keep your cardiovascular system healthy. 	smoking is one of the biggest risk factors for cardiovascular disease	true
There are many risk factors that can cause a person to develop cardiovascular disease. A risk factor is anything that is linked to an increased chance of developing a disease. Some of the risk factors for cardiovascular disease you cannot control, but there are many risk factors you can control. Risk factors you cannot control include: Age: The older a person is, the greater their chance of developing a cardiovascular disease. Gender: Men under age 64 are much more likely to die of coronary heart disease than women, although the gender difference decreases with age. Genetics: Family history of cardiovascular disease increases a persons chance of developing heart disease. Risk factors you can control include many lifestyle factors: Tobacco smoking: Giving up smoking or never starting to smoke is the best way to reduce the risk of heart disease. Diabetes: Diabetes can cause bodily changes, such as high cholesterol levels, which are are risk factors for cardiovascular disease. High cholesterol levels: High amounts of "bad cholesterol," increase the risk of cardiovascular disease. Obesity: Having a very high percentage of body fat, especially if the fat is mostly found in the upper body, rather than the hips and thighs, increases risk significantly. High blood pressure: If the heart and blood vessels have to work harder than normal, this puts the cardiovas- cular system under a strain. Lack of physical activity: Aerobic activities, such as the one pictured below ( Figure 1.1), help keep your heart healthy. To reduce the risk of disease, you should be active for at least 60 minutes a day, five days a week. Poor eating habits: Eating mostly foods that do not have many nutrients other than fat or carbohydrate leads to high cholesterol levels, obesity, and cardiovascular disease ( Figure 1.2). 60 minutes a day of vigorous aerobic activity, such as basketball, is enough to help keep your cardiovascular system healthy. 	the older a person is the greater their chance of developing a cardiovascular disease	true
The 1,000 or so species of cartilaginous fish are subdivided into two subclasses: the first includes sharks, rays, and skates; the second includes chimaera, sometimes called ghost sharks. Fish from this group range in size from the dwarf lanternshark, at 6.3 inches, to the over 50-foot whale shark. Sharks obviously have jaws, as do the other cartilaginous fish. These fish evolved from the jawless fish. So why did fish eventually evolve to have jaws? Such an adaptation would allow fish to eat a much wider variety of food, including plants and other organisms. Other characteristics of cartilaginous fish include: Paired fins. Paired nostrils. Scales. Two-chambered hearts. Skeletons made of cartilage rather than bone. Cartilage is supportive tissue that does not have as much calcium as bones, which makes bones rigid. Cartilage is softer and more flexible than bone. 	the cartilaginous are the first fish with a bony skeleton	false
The 1,000 or so species of cartilaginous fish are subdivided into two subclasses: the first includes sharks, rays, and skates; the second includes chimaera, sometimes called ghost sharks. Fish from this group range in size from the dwarf lanternshark, at 6.3 inches, to the over 50-foot whale shark. Sharks obviously have jaws, as do the other cartilaginous fish. These fish evolved from the jawless fish. So why did fish eventually evolve to have jaws? Such an adaptation would allow fish to eat a much wider variety of food, including plants and other organisms. Other characteristics of cartilaginous fish include: Paired fins. Paired nostrils. Scales. Two-chambered hearts. Skeletons made of cartilage rather than bone. Cartilage is supportive tissue that does not have as much calcium as bones, which makes bones rigid. Cartilage is softer and more flexible than bone. 	the cartilaginous fish are the first fish with jaws	true
How does the food you eat provide energy? When you need a quick boost of energy, you might reach for an apple or a candy bar. But cells do not "eat" apples or candy bars; these foods need to be broken down so that cells can use them. Through the process of cellular respiration, the energy in food is changed into energy that can be used by the bodys cells. Initially, the sugars in the food you eat are digested into the simple sugar glucose, a monosaccharide. Recall that glucose is the sugar produced by the plant during photosynthesis. The glucose, or the polysaccharide made from many glucose molecules, such as starch, is then passed to the organism that eats the plant. This organism could be you, or it could be the organism that you eat. Either way, it is the glucose molecules that holds the energy. 	the main reason you need to eat is to get energy	true
Specifically, during cellular respiration, the energy stored in glucose is transferred to ATP ( Figure 1.1). ATP, or adenosine triphosphate, is chemical energy the cell can use. It is the molecule that provides energy for your cells to perform work, such as moving your muscles as you walk down the street. But cellular respiration is slightly more complicated than just converting the energy from glucose into ATP. Cellular respiration can be described as the reverse or opposite of photosynthesis. During cellular respiration, glucose, in the presence of oxygen, is converted into carbon dioxide and water. Recall that carbon dioxide and water are the starting products of photosynthesis. What are the products of photosynthesis? The process can be summarized as: glucose + oxygen  carbon dioxide + water. During this process, the energy stored in glucose is transferred to ATP. Energy is stored in the bonds between the phosphate groups (PO4  ) of the ATP molecule. When ATP is broken down into ADP (adenosine diphosphate) and inorganic phosphate, energy is released. When ADP and inorganic phosphate are joined to form ATP, energy is stored. During cellular respiration, about 36 to 38 ATP molecules are produced for every glucose molecule. The structural formula for adenosine triphosphate (ATP). During cellular respi- ration, energy from the chemical bonds of the food you eat must be transferred to ATP. 	cellular respiration can be described as the reverse or opposite of photosynthesis	true
The central nervous system (CNS) ( Figure 1.1) is the largest part of the nervous system. It includes the brain and the spinal cord. The bony skull protects the brain. The spinal cord is protected within the bones of the spine, which are called vertebrae. 	the brain spinal cord and adjoining nerves make up the central nervous system	false
The spinal cord is a long, tube-shaped bundle of neurons, protected by the vertebrae. It runs from the brain stem to the lower back. The main job of the spinal cord is to carry nerve impulses back and forth between the body and brain. The spinal cord is like a two-way highway. Messages about the body, both inside and out, pass through the spinal cord to the brain. Messages from the brain pass in the other direction through the spinal cord to tell the body what to do. 	the brain contains up to 100000000000 neurons	true
A molecule is any combination of two or more atoms. The oxygen in the air we breathe is two oxygen atoms connected by a chemical bond to form O2 , or molecular oxygen. A carbon dioxide molecule is a combination of one carbon atom and two oxygen atoms, CO2 . Because carbon dioxide includes two different elements, it is a compound as well as a molecule. A compound is any combination of two or more different elements. A compound has different properties from the elements that it contains. Elements and combinations of elements (compounds) make up all the many types of matter in the Universe. A chemical reaction is a process that breaks or forms the bonds between atoms of molecules and compounds. For example, two hydrogens and one oxygen bind together to form water, H2 O. The molecules that come together to start a chemical reaction are the reactants. So hydrogen and oxygen are the reactants. The product is the end result of a reaction. In this example, water is the product. Atoms also come together to form compounds much larger than water. It is some of these large compounds that come together to form the basis of the cell. So essentially, your cells are made out of compounds, which are made out of atoms. 	the difference between a hydrogen atom and a helium atom is one proton	true
If you pull a flower petal from a plant and break it in half, and then take that piece and break it in half again, and take the next piece and break it half, and so on, and so on, until you cannot even see the flower anymore, what do you think you will find? We know that the flower petal is made of cells, but what are cells made of? Scientists have broken down matter, or anything that takes up space and has masslike a cellinto the smallest pieces that cannot be broken down anymore. Every physical object, including rocks, animals, flowers, and your body, are all made up of matter. Matter is made up of a mixture of things called elements. Elements are substances that cannot be broken down into simpler substances. There are more than 100 known elements, and 92 occur naturally around us. The others have been made only in the laboratory. Inside of elements, you will find identical atoms. An atom is the simplest and smallest particle of matter that still has chemical properties of the element. Atoms are the building block of all of the elements that make up the matter in your body or any other living or non-living thing. Atoms are so small that only the most powerful microscopes can see them. Atoms themselves are composed of even smaller particles, including positively charged protons, uncharged neu- trons, and negatively charged electrons. Protons and neutrons are located in the center of the atom, or the nucleus, and the electrons move around the nucleus. How many protons an atom has determines what element it is. For example, hydrogen (H) has just one proton, helium (He) always has two protons ( Figure 1.1), while sodium (Na) always has 11. All the atoms of a particular element have the exact same number of protons, and the number of protons is that elements atomic number. An atom usually has the same number of protons and electrons, but sometimes an atom may gain or lose an electron, giving the atom a positive or negative charge. These atoms are known as ions and are depicted with a "+" or "-" sign. Ions, such as H+ , Na+ , K+ , or Cl have significant biological roles. An atom of Helium (He) contains two positively charged protons (red), two uncharged neutrons (blue), and two negatively charged electrons (yellow). 	matter is anything that takes up space and has mass	true
Some children are born with genetic defects that are not carried by a single gene. Instead, an error in a larger part of the chromosome or even in an entire chromosome causes the disorder. Usually the error happens when the egg or sperm is forming. Having extra chromosomes or damaged chromosomes can cause disorders. 	chromosomal mutations usually happen when the organism is forming	false
One common example of an extra-chromosome disorder is Down syndrome ( Figure 1.1). Children with Down syndrome are mentally disabled and also have physical deformities. Down syndrome occurs when a baby receives an extra chromosome 21 from one of his or her parents. Usually, a child will receive one chromosome 21 from the mother and one chromosome 21 from the father. In an individual with Down syndrome, however, there are three Chromosomes of a person with Down Syndrome. Notice the extra chromosome 21. copies of chromosome 21 ( Figure 1.2). Therefore, Down syndrome is also known as Trisomy 21. These people have 47 total chromosomes. Another example of a chromosomal disorder is Klinefelter syndrome, in which a male inherits an extra X chromosome. These individuals have an XXY genotype. They have underdeveloped sex organs and elongated limbs. They also have difficulty learning new things. 	down syndrome people have 47 chromosomes	true
You may think that your blood vessels have thick walls without any leaks, but thats not true. Blood vessels can leak just like any other pipe. The lymphatic system makes sure leaked blood returns back to the bloodstream. When a small amount of fluid leaks out from the blood vessels, it collects in the spaces between cells and tissues. Some of the fluid returns to the cardiovascular system, and the rest is collected by the lymph vessels of the lymphatic system ( Figure 1.2). The fluid that collects in the lymph vessels is called lymph. The lymphatic system then returns the lymph to the cardiovascular system. Unlike the cardiovascular system, the lymphatic system is not closed (meaning it is an open circulatory system that releases and collects fluid) and has no central pump (or heart). Lymph moves slowly in lymph vessels. It is moved along in the lymph vessels by the squeezing action of smooth muscles and skeletal muscles. Lymph capillaries collect fluid that leaks out from blood capillaries. The lymphatic vessels return the fluid to the cardiovas- cular system. 	the lymphatic system is a closed circulatory system	false
The lymphatic system also plays an important role in the immune system. For example, the lymphatic system makes white blood cells that protect the body from diseases. Cells of the lymphatic system produce two types of white blood cells, T cells and B cells, that are involved in fighting specific pathogens. Lymph nodes, which are scattered throughout the lymphatic system, act as filters or traps for foreign particles and are important in the proper functioning of the immune system. The role of the lymphatic system in the immune response is discussed in additional concepts. 	the heart pumps lymph throughout the lymphatic system	false
Photosynthesis and cellular respiration are connected through an important relationship. This relationship enables life to survive as we know it. The products of one process are the reactants of the other. Notice that the equation for cellular respiration is the direct opposite of photosynthesis: Cellular Respiration: C6 H12 O6 + 6O2  6CO2 + 6H2 O Photosynthesis: 6CO2 + 6H2 O  C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 Photosynthesis makes the glucose that is used in cellular respiration to make ATP. The glucose is then turned back into carbon dioxide, which is used in photosynthesis. While water is broken down to form oxygen during photosynthesis, in cellular respiration oxygen is combined with hydrogen to form water. While photosynthesis requires carbon dioxide and releases oxygen, cellular respiration requires oxygen and releases carbon dioxide. It is the released oxygen that is used by us and most other organisms for cellular respiration. We breathe in that oxygen, which is carried through our blood to all our cells. In our cells, oxygen allows cellular respiration to proceed. Cellular respiration works best in the presence of oxygen. Without oxygen, much less ATP would be produced. Cellular respiration and photosynthesis are important parts of the carbon cycle. The carbon cycle is the pathways through which carbon is recycled in the biosphere. While cellular respiration releases carbon dioxide into the environment, photosynthesis pulls carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere. The exchange of carbon dioxide and oxygen during photosynthesis ( Figure 1.1) and cellular respiration worldwide helps to keep atmospheric oxygen and carbon dioxide at stable levels. Cellular respiration and photosynthesis are direct opposite reactions. Energy from the sun enters a plant and is con- verted into glucose during photosynthe- sis. Some of the energy is used to make ATP in the mitochondria during cellular respiration, and some is lost to the envi- ronment as heat. 	the products of cellular respiration are the reactants of photosynthesis	true
Photosynthesis and cellular respiration are connected through an important relationship. This relationship enables life to survive as we know it. The products of one process are the reactants of the other. Notice that the equation for cellular respiration is the direct opposite of photosynthesis: Cellular Respiration: C6 H12 O6 + 6O2  6CO2 + 6H2 O Photosynthesis: 6CO2 + 6H2 O  C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 Photosynthesis makes the glucose that is used in cellular respiration to make ATP. The glucose is then turned back into carbon dioxide, which is used in photosynthesis. While water is broken down to form oxygen during photosynthesis, in cellular respiration oxygen is combined with hydrogen to form water. While photosynthesis requires carbon dioxide and releases oxygen, cellular respiration requires oxygen and releases carbon dioxide. It is the released oxygen that is used by us and most other organisms for cellular respiration. We breathe in that oxygen, which is carried through our blood to all our cells. In our cells, oxygen allows cellular respiration to proceed. Cellular respiration works best in the presence of oxygen. Without oxygen, much less ATP would be produced. Cellular respiration and photosynthesis are important parts of the carbon cycle. The carbon cycle is the pathways through which carbon is recycled in the biosphere. While cellular respiration releases carbon dioxide into the environment, photosynthesis pulls carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere. The exchange of carbon dioxide and oxygen during photosynthesis ( Figure 1.1) and cellular respiration worldwide helps to keep atmospheric oxygen and carbon dioxide at stable levels. Cellular respiration and photosynthesis are direct opposite reactions. Energy from the sun enters a plant and is con- verted into glucose during photosynthe- sis. Some of the energy is used to make ATP in the mitochondria during cellular respiration, and some is lost to the envi- ronment as heat. 	cellular respiration and photosynthesis are important processes in the recycling of carbon	true
Type 1 diabetes occurs when the immune system attacks normal cells of the pancreas. Since the cells in the pancreas are damaged, the pancreas cannot make insulin. Type 1 diabetes usually develops in childhood or adolescence. People with type 1 diabetes must frequently check the sugar in their blood. They use a meter to monitor their blood sugar ( Figure 1.1). Whenever their blood sugar starts to get too high, they need a shot of insulin. The insulin brings their blood sugar back to normal. There is no cure for type 1 diabetes. Therefore, insulin shots must be taken for life. Most people with this type of diabetes learn how to give themselves insulin shots. This is one type of meter used by people with diabetes to measure their blood sugar. Modern meters like this one need only a drop of blood and take less than a minute to use. 	in type 1 diabetes the pancreas produces defective insulin	false
Type 1 diabetes occurs when the immune system attacks normal cells of the pancreas. Since the cells in the pancreas are damaged, the pancreas cannot make insulin. Type 1 diabetes usually develops in childhood or adolescence. People with type 1 diabetes must frequently check the sugar in their blood. They use a meter to monitor their blood sugar ( Figure 1.1). Whenever their blood sugar starts to get too high, they need a shot of insulin. The insulin brings their blood sugar back to normal. There is no cure for type 1 diabetes. Therefore, insulin shots must be taken for life. Most people with this type of diabetes learn how to give themselves insulin shots. This is one type of meter used by people with diabetes to measure their blood sugar. Modern meters like this one need only a drop of blood and take less than a minute to use. 	in type 2 diabetes the pancreas produces insulin but the insulin is not used correctly	true
The mouth and stomach are just two of the organs of the digestive system. Other digestive system organs are the esophagus, small intestine, and large intestine. Below, you can see that the digestive organs form a long tube ( Figure 1.1). In adults, this tube is about 30 feet long! At one end of the tube is the mouth. At the other end is the anus. Food enters the mouth and then passes through the rest of the digestive system. Food waste leaves the body through the anus. The organs of the digestive system are lined with muscles. The muscles contract, or tighten, to push food through the system ( Figure 1.2). The muscles contract in waves. The waves pass through the digestive system like waves through a slinky. This movement of muscle contractions is called peristalsis. Without peristalsis, food would not be able to move through the digestive system. Peristalsis is an involuntary process, which means that it occurs without your conscious control. The liver, gallbladder, and pancreas are also organs of the digestive system ( Figure 1.1). Food does not pass through these three organs. However, these organs are important for digestion. They secrete or store enzymes or other chemicals that are needed to help digest food chemically. 	the mouth is considered an organ of the digestive system	true
The mouth and stomach are just two of the organs of the digestive system. Other digestive system organs are the esophagus, small intestine, and large intestine. Below, you can see that the digestive organs form a long tube ( Figure 1.1). In adults, this tube is about 30 feet long! At one end of the tube is the mouth. At the other end is the anus. Food enters the mouth and then passes through the rest of the digestive system. Food waste leaves the body through the anus. The organs of the digestive system are lined with muscles. The muscles contract, or tighten, to push food through the system ( Figure 1.2). The muscles contract in waves. The waves pass through the digestive system like waves through a slinky. This movement of muscle contractions is called peristalsis. Without peristalsis, food would not be able to move through the digestive system. Peristalsis is an involuntary process, which means that it occurs without your conscious control. The liver, gallbladder, and pancreas are also organs of the digestive system ( Figure 1.1). Food does not pass through these three organs. However, these organs are important for digestion. They secrete or store enzymes or other chemicals that are needed to help digest food chemically. 	the movement of food through your digestive system is an involuntary process	true
The nervous system controls sensing, feeling, and thinking. It also controls movement and just about every other body function. Thats why problems with the nervous system can affect the entire body. Diseases of the nervous system include brain and spinal cord infections. Other problems of the nervous system range from very serious diseases, such as tumors, to less serious problems, such as tension headaches. Some of these diseases are present at birth. Others begin during childhood or adulthood. 	headaches are an illness of the nervous system	true
When you think of infections, you probably think of an ear infection or strep throat. You probably dont think of a brain or spinal cord infection. But bacteria and viruses can infect these organs as well as other parts of the body. Infections of the brain and spinal cord are not very common. But when they happen, they can be very serious. Thats why its important to know their symptoms. 	cns diseases can be caused by bacteria and viruses getting into the brain or spinal cord	true
DNA is the material that makes up our chromosomes and stores our genetic information. When you build a house, you need a blueprint, a set of instructions that tells you how to build. The DNA is like the blueprint for living organisms. The genetic information is a set of instructions that tell your cells what to do. DNA is an abbreviation for deoxyribonucleic acid. As you may recall, nucleic acids are a type of macromolecule that store information. The deoxyribo part of the name refers to the name of the sugar that is contained in DNA, deoxyribose. DNA may provide the instructions to make up all living things, but it is actually a very simple molecule. DNA is made of a very long chain of nucleotides. In fact, in you, the smallest DNA molecule has well over 20 million nucleotides. 	dna is made of long chains of nucleic acids	false
Nucleotides are composed of three main parts: 1. a phosphate group. 2. a 5-carbon sugar (deoxyribose in DNA). 3. a nitrogen-containing base. The only difference between each nucleotide is the identity of the base. There are only four possible bases that make up each DNA nucleotide: adenine (A), guanine (G), thymine (T), and cytosine (C). 	deoxyribose is the base in dna	false
Echinoderms reproduce sexually. In most echinoderms, eggs and sperm cells are released into open water, and fertilization takes place when the eggs and sperm meet. This is called external fertilization, and is typical of many marine animals. The release of sperm and eggs often occurs when organisms are in the same place at the same time. Internal fertilization takes place in only a few species. Some species even take care of their offspring, like parents! 	echinoderms have an amazing power of regeneration	true
Echinoderms reproduce sexually. In most echinoderms, eggs and sperm cells are released into open water, and fertilization takes place when the eggs and sperm meet. This is called external fertilization, and is typical of many marine animals. The release of sperm and eggs often occurs when organisms are in the same place at the same time. Internal fertilization takes place in only a few species. Some species even take care of their offspring, like parents! 	echinoderms such as starfish have a hard external skeleton	false
Water pollutants can have an effect on both the ecology of ecosystems and on humans. As a result of water pollution, humans may not be able to use a waterway for recreation and fishing. Drinking water can also be affected if a toxin enters the groundwater. 	unsafe water supplies can be deadly to humans	true
Unsafe water supplies have drastic effects on human health. Waterborne diseases are diseases due to microscopic pathogens in fresh water. These diseases can be caused by protozoa, viruses, bacteria, and intestinal parasites. In many parts of the world there are no water treatment plants. If sewage or animal manure gets into a river, then people downstream will get sick when they drink the water. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), diarrheal disease is responsible for the deaths of 1.8 million people every year. It was estimated that 88% of the cases of diarrheal disease are caused by unsafe water supplies. 	many parts of the world do not have water treatment plants	true
When an herbivore eats a plant, the energy in the plant tissues is used by the herbivore. But how much of that energy is transferred to the herbivore? Remember that plants are producers, bringing the energy into the ecosystem by converting sunlight into glucose. Does the plant use some of the energy for its own needs? Recall the energy is the ability to do work, and the plant has plenty or "work" to do. So of course it needs and uses energy. It converts the glucose it makes into ATP through cellular respiration just like other organisms. After the plant uses the energy from glucose for its own needs, the excess energy is available to the organism that eats the plant. The herbivore uses the energy from the plant to power its own life processes and to build more body tissues. However, only about 10% of the total energy from the plant gets stored in the herbivores body as extra body tissue. The rest of the energy is used by the herbivore and released as heat. The next consumer on the food chain that eats the herbivore will only store about 10% of the total energy from the herbivore in its own body. This means the carnivore will store only about 1% of the total energy that was originally in the plant. In other words, only about 10% of energy of one step in a food chain is stored in the next step in the food chain. The majority of the energy is used by the organism or released to the environment. Every time energy is transferred from one organism to another, there is a loss of energy. This loss of energy can be shown in an energy pyramid. An example of an energy pyramid is pictured below ( Figure 1.1). Since there is energy loss at each step in a food chain, it takes many producers to support just a few carnivores in a community. Each step of the food chain in the energy pyramid is called a trophic level. Plants or other photosynthetic organisms ( autotrophs) are found on the first trophic level, at the bottom of the pyramid. The next level will be the herbivores, and then the carnivores that eat the herbivores. The energy pyramid ( Figure 1.1) shows four levels of a food chain, from producers to carnivores. Because of the high rate of energy loss in food chains, there are usually only 4 or 5 trophic levels in the food chain or energy pyramid. There just is not enough energy to support any additional trophic levels. Heterotrophs are found in all levels of an energy pyramid other than the first level. 	plants convert glucose into atp through photosynthesis	false
When an herbivore eats a plant, the energy in the plant tissues is used by the herbivore. But how much of that energy is transferred to the herbivore? Remember that plants are producers, bringing the energy into the ecosystem by converting sunlight into glucose. Does the plant use some of the energy for its own needs? Recall the energy is the ability to do work, and the plant has plenty or "work" to do. So of course it needs and uses energy. It converts the glucose it makes into ATP through cellular respiration just like other organisms. After the plant uses the energy from glucose for its own needs, the excess energy is available to the organism that eats the plant. The herbivore uses the energy from the plant to power its own life processes and to build more body tissues. However, only about 10% of the total energy from the plant gets stored in the herbivores body as extra body tissue. The rest of the energy is used by the herbivore and released as heat. The next consumer on the food chain that eats the herbivore will only store about 10% of the total energy from the herbivore in its own body. This means the carnivore will store only about 1% of the total energy that was originally in the plant. In other words, only about 10% of energy of one step in a food chain is stored in the next step in the food chain. The majority of the energy is used by the organism or released to the environment. Every time energy is transferred from one organism to another, there is a loss of energy. This loss of energy can be shown in an energy pyramid. An example of an energy pyramid is pictured below ( Figure 1.1). Since there is energy loss at each step in a food chain, it takes many producers to support just a few carnivores in a community. Each step of the food chain in the energy pyramid is called a trophic level. Plants or other photosynthetic organisms ( autotrophs) are found on the first trophic level, at the bottom of the pyramid. The next level will be the herbivores, and then the carnivores that eat the herbivores. The energy pyramid ( Figure 1.1) shows four levels of a food chain, from producers to carnivores. Because of the high rate of energy loss in food chains, there are usually only 4 or 5 trophic levels in the food chain or energy pyramid. There just is not enough energy to support any additional trophic levels. Heterotrophs are found in all levels of an energy pyramid other than the first level. 	because of the constant loss of energy there can be a maximum of 7 trophic levels in a food chain	false
Chemical digestion could not take place without the help of digestive enzymes. An enzyme is a protein that speeds up chemical reactions in the body. Digestive enzymes speed up chemical reactions that break down large food molecules into small molecules. Did you ever use a wrench to tighten a bolt? You could tighten a bolt with your fingers, but it would be difficult and slow. If you use a wrench, you can tighten a bolt much more easily and quickly. Enzymes are like wrenches. They make it much easier and quicker for chemical reactions to take place. Like a wrench, enzymes can also be used over and over again. But you need the appropriate size and shape of the wrench to efficiently tighten the bolt, just like each enzyme is specific for the reaction it helps. Digestive enzymes are released, or secreted, by the organs of the digestive system. These enzymes include proteases that digest proteins, and nucleases that digest nucleic acids. Examples of digestive enzymes are: Amylase, produced in the mouth. It helps break down large starch molecules into smaller sugar molecules. Pepsin, produced in the stomach. Pepsin helps break down proteins into amino acids. Trypsin, produced in the pancreas. Trypsin also breaks down proteins. Pancreatic lipase, produced in the pancreas. It is used to break apart fats. Deoxyribonuclease and ribonuclease, produced in the pancreas. They are enzymes that break bonds in nucleic acids like DNA and RNA. Bile salts are bile acids that help to break down fat. Bile acids are made in the liver. When you eat a meal, bile is secreted into the intestine, where it breaks down the fats ( Figure 1.1). 	an enzyme is a protein that speeds up chemical reactions in the body	true
If you are a typical teenager, you like to eat. For your body to break down, absorb and spread the nutrients from your food throughout your body, your digestive system and endocrine system need to work together. The endocrine system sends hormones around your body to communicate between cells. Essentially, hormones are chemical messenger molecules. Digestive hormones are made by cells lining the stomach and small intestine. These hormones cross into the blood where they can affect other parts of the digestive system. Some of these hormones are listed below. Gastrin, which signals the secretion of gastric acid. Cholecystokinin, which signals the secretion of pancreatic enzymes. Secretin, which signals secretion of water and bicarbonate from the pancreas. Ghrelin, which signals when you are hungry. Gastric inhibitory polypeptide, which stops or decreases gastric secretion. It also causes the release of insulin in response to high blood glucose levels. 	enzymes in saliva break down complex carbohydrates into simple sugars	true
Natural selection acts on the phenotype (the traits or characteristics) of an individual. On the other hand, natural selection does not act on the underlying genotype (the genetic makeup) of an individual. For many traits, the homozygous genotype, AA, for example, has the same phenotype as the heterozygous Aa genotype. If both an AA and Aa individual have the same phenotype, the environment cannot distinguish between them. So natural selection cannot select for a homozygous individual over a heterozygous individual. Even if the "aa" phenotype is lethal, the recessive a allele, will be maintained in the population through heterozygous Aa individuals. Furthermore, the mating of two heterozygous individuals can produce homozygous recessive (aa) individuals. However, natural selection can and does differentiate between dominant and recessive phenotypes. 	you can tell the phenotype of a dog by looking at it	true
Natural selection acts on the phenotype (the traits or characteristics) of an individual. On the other hand, natural selection does not act on the underlying genotype (the genetic makeup) of an individual. For many traits, the homozygous genotype, AA, for example, has the same phenotype as the heterozygous Aa genotype. If both an AA and Aa individual have the same phenotype, the environment cannot distinguish between them. So natural selection cannot select for a homozygous individual over a heterozygous individual. Even if the "aa" phenotype is lethal, the recessive a allele, will be maintained in the population through heterozygous Aa individuals. Furthermore, the mating of two heterozygous individuals can produce homozygous recessive (aa) individuals. However, natural selection can and does differentiate between dominant and recessive phenotypes. 	natural selection cannot distinguish between dominant and recessive phenotypes	false
So what happens to your bodys wastes? Obviously, you must get rid of them. This is the job of the excretory system. You remove waste as a gas (carbon dioxide), as a liquid (urine and sweat), and as a solid. Excretion is the process of removing wastes and excess water from the body. Recall that carbon dioxide travels through the blood and is transferred to the lungs where it is exhaled. In the large intestine, the remains of food are turned into solid waste for excretion. How is waste other than carbon dioxide removed from the blood? That is the role of the kidneys. Urine is a liquid waste formed by the kidneys as they filter the blood. If you are getting plenty of fluids, your urine should be almost clear. But you might have noticed that sometimes your urine is darker than usual. Do you know why this happens? Sometimes your body is low on water and trying to reduce the amount of water lost in urine. Therefore, your urine gets darker than usual. Your body is striving to maintain homeostasis through the process of excretion. Urine helps remove excess water, salts, and nitrogen from your body. Your body also needs to remove the wastes that build up from cell activity and from digestion. If these wastes are not removed, your cells can stop working, and you can get very sick. The organs of your excretory system help to release wastes from the body. The organs of the excretory system are also parts of other organ systems. For example, your lungs are part of the respiratory system. Your lungs remove carbon dioxide from your body, so they are also part of the excretory system. More organs of the excretory system are listed below ( Table 1.1). Organ(s) Function Lungs Skin Remove carbon dioxide. Sweat glands remove water, salts, and other wastes. Removes solid waste and some wa- ter in the form of feces. Remove urea, salts, and excess wa- ter from the blood. Large intestine Kidneys Component of Other Organ Sys- tem Respiratory system Integumentary system Digestive system Urinary system 	the excretory system includes organs that are also components of other organ systems	true
So what happens to your bodys wastes? Obviously, you must get rid of them. This is the job of the excretory system. You remove waste as a gas (carbon dioxide), as a liquid (urine and sweat), and as a solid. Excretion is the process of removing wastes and excess water from the body. Recall that carbon dioxide travels through the blood and is transferred to the lungs where it is exhaled. In the large intestine, the remains of food are turned into solid waste for excretion. How is waste other than carbon dioxide removed from the blood? That is the role of the kidneys. Urine is a liquid waste formed by the kidneys as they filter the blood. If you are getting plenty of fluids, your urine should be almost clear. But you might have noticed that sometimes your urine is darker than usual. Do you know why this happens? Sometimes your body is low on water and trying to reduce the amount of water lost in urine. Therefore, your urine gets darker than usual. Your body is striving to maintain homeostasis through the process of excretion. Urine helps remove excess water, salts, and nitrogen from your body. Your body also needs to remove the wastes that build up from cell activity and from digestion. If these wastes are not removed, your cells can stop working, and you can get very sick. The organs of your excretory system help to release wastes from the body. The organs of the excretory system are also parts of other organ systems. For example, your lungs are part of the respiratory system. Your lungs remove carbon dioxide from your body, so they are also part of the excretory system. More organs of the excretory system are listed below ( Table 1.1). Organ(s) Function Lungs Skin Remove carbon dioxide. Sweat glands remove water, salts, and other wastes. Removes solid waste and some wa- ter in the form of feces. Remove urea, salts, and excess wa- ter from the blood. Large intestine Kidneys Component of Other Organ Sys- tem Respiratory system Integumentary system Digestive system Urinary system 	urine is a waste formed by the kidneys	true
Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are bacterial infections of any part of the urinary tract. When bacteria get into the bladder or kidney and produce more bacteria in the urine, they cause a UTI. The most common type of UTI is a bladder infection. Women get UTIs more often than men. UTIs are often treated with antibiotics. Most UTIs are not serious, but some infections can lead to serious problems. Long lasting kidney infections can cause permanent damage, including kidney scars, poor kidney function, high blood pressure, and other problems. Some sudden kidney infections can be life threatening, especially if the bacteria enter the bloodstream, a condition called septicemia. What are the signs and symptoms of a UTI? a burning feeling when you urinate, frequent or intense urges to urinate, even when you have little urine to pass, pain in your back or side below the ribs, cloudy, dark, bloody, or foul-smelling urine, fever or chills. You should see your doctor if you have signs of a UTI. Your doctor will diagnose a UTIs by asking about your symptoms and then testing a sample of your urine. 	men get more uti than women	false
Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are bacterial infections of any part of the urinary tract. When bacteria get into the bladder or kidney and produce more bacteria in the urine, they cause a UTI. The most common type of UTI is a bladder infection. Women get UTIs more often than men. UTIs are often treated with antibiotics. Most UTIs are not serious, but some infections can lead to serious problems. Long lasting kidney infections can cause permanent damage, including kidney scars, poor kidney function, high blood pressure, and other problems. Some sudden kidney infections can be life threatening, especially if the bacteria enter the bloodstream, a condition called septicemia. What are the signs and symptoms of a UTI? a burning feeling when you urinate, frequent or intense urges to urinate, even when you have little urine to pass, pain in your back or side below the ribs, cloudy, dark, bloody, or foul-smelling urine, fever or chills. You should see your doctor if you have signs of a UTI. Your doctor will diagnose a UTIs by asking about your symptoms and then testing a sample of your urine. 	most utis are not serious	true
A population is a group of organisms of the same species, all living in the same area and interacting with each other. Since they live together in one area, members of the same species reproduce together. Ecologists who study populations determine how healthy or stable the populations are. They also study how the individuals of a species interact with each other and how populations interact with the environment. If a group of similar organisms in the same area cannot reproduce with members of the other group, then they are members of two distinct species and form two populations. Ecologists look at many factors that help to describe a population. First, ecologists can measure the number of individuals that make up the population, known as population size. They can then determine the population density, which is the number of individuals of the same species in an area. Population density can be expressed as number per area, such as 20 mice/acre, or 50 rabbits/square mile. Ecologists also study how individuals in a population are spread across an environment. This spacing of individuals within a population is called dispersion. Some species may be clumped or clustered ( Figure 1.1) in an area. Others may be evenly spaced ( Figure 1.2). Still others may be spaced randomly within an area. The population density and dispersion have an effect on reproduction and population size. What do you think the relationship is between population density, dispersion and size? Clumped species are closer together. This may allow for easier reproduction. A population of cacti in the Sonoran Desert generally shows even dispersion due to competition for water. Ecologists also study the birth and death rates of the population. Together these give the growth rate (the birth rate minus the death rate), which tells how fast (or slow) the population size is changing. The birth rate is the number of births within a population during a specific time period. The death rate is the number of deaths within a population during a specific time period. Knowing the birth and death rates of populations gives you information about a populations health. For example, when a population is made up of mostly young organisms and the birth rate is high, the population is growing. A population with equal birth and death rates will remain the same size. Populations that are decreasing in size have a higher death rate than birth rate. 	members of a species that are clumped together may have a better chance of reproducing	true
A population is a group of organisms of the same species, all living in the same area and interacting with each other. Since they live together in one area, members of the same species reproduce together. Ecologists who study populations determine how healthy or stable the populations are. They also study how the individuals of a species interact with each other and how populations interact with the environment. If a group of similar organisms in the same area cannot reproduce with members of the other group, then they are members of two distinct species and form two populations. Ecologists look at many factors that help to describe a population. First, ecologists can measure the number of individuals that make up the population, known as population size. They can then determine the population density, which is the number of individuals of the same species in an area. Population density can be expressed as number per area, such as 20 mice/acre, or 50 rabbits/square mile. Ecologists also study how individuals in a population are spread across an environment. This spacing of individuals within a population is called dispersion. Some species may be clumped or clustered ( Figure 1.1) in an area. Others may be evenly spaced ( Figure 1.2). Still others may be spaced randomly within an area. The population density and dispersion have an effect on reproduction and population size. What do you think the relationship is between population density, dispersion and size? Clumped species are closer together. This may allow for easier reproduction. A population of cacti in the Sonoran Desert generally shows even dispersion due to competition for water. Ecologists also study the birth and death rates of the population. Together these give the growth rate (the birth rate minus the death rate), which tells how fast (or slow) the population size is changing. The birth rate is the number of births within a population during a specific time period. The death rate is the number of deaths within a population during a specific time period. Knowing the birth and death rates of populations gives you information about a populations health. For example, when a population is made up of mostly young organisms and the birth rate is high, the population is growing. A population with equal birth and death rates will remain the same size. Populations that are decreasing in size have a higher death rate than birth rate. 	birth rate  death rate  growth rate	false
The female reproductive organs include the vagina, uterus, fallopian tubes, and ovaries ( Figure 1.1). The breasts are not shown in this figure. They are not considered reproductive organs, even though they are involved in reproduction. They contain mammary glands that give milk to feed a baby. The milk leaves the breast through the nipple when the baby sucks on it. The vagina is a cylinder-shaped organ found inside of the female body. One end of the vagina opens at the outside of the body. The other end joins with the uterus. During sexual intercourse, sperm may be released into the vagina. If this occurs, the sperm will move through the vagina and into the uterus. During birth, a baby passes from the uterus to the vagina to leave the body. The uterus is a hollow organ with muscular walls. The part that connects the vagina with the uterus is called the cervix. The uterus is where a baby develops until birth. The walls of the uterus grow bigger as the baby grows. The muscular walls of the uterus push the baby out during birth. This drawing shows the organs of the female reproductive system. It shows the organs from the side. Find each organ in the drawing as you read about it in the text. The two ovaries are small, oval organs on either side of the uterus. Each ovary contains thousands of eggs, with about 1-2 million immature eggs present at birth and 40,000 immature eggs present at puberty, as most of the eggs die off. The eggs do not fully develop until a female has gone through puberty. About once a month, on average one egg completes development and is released by the ovary. The ovaries also secrete estrogen, the main female sex hormone. The two fallopian tubes are narrow tubes that open off from the uterus. Each tube reaches for one of the ovaries, but the tubes are not attached to the ovaries. The end of each fallopian tube by the ovary has fingers ( Figure 1.1). They sweep an egg into the fallopian tube. Then the egg passes through the fallopian tube to the uterus. If an egg is to be fertilized, this will occur in the fallopian tube. A fertilized egg then implants into the wall of the uterus, where it begins to develop. An unfertilized egg will flow through the uterus and be excreted from the body. 	breasts are considered extremely important reproductive organs	false
The female reproductive organs include the vagina, uterus, fallopian tubes, and ovaries ( Figure 1.1). The breasts are not shown in this figure. They are not considered reproductive organs, even though they are involved in reproduction. They contain mammary glands that give milk to feed a baby. The milk leaves the breast through the nipple when the baby sucks on it. The vagina is a cylinder-shaped organ found inside of the female body. One end of the vagina opens at the outside of the body. The other end joins with the uterus. During sexual intercourse, sperm may be released into the vagina. If this occurs, the sperm will move through the vagina and into the uterus. During birth, a baby passes from the uterus to the vagina to leave the body. The uterus is a hollow organ with muscular walls. The part that connects the vagina with the uterus is called the cervix. The uterus is where a baby develops until birth. The walls of the uterus grow bigger as the baby grows. The muscular walls of the uterus push the baby out during birth. This drawing shows the organs of the female reproductive system. It shows the organs from the side. Find each organ in the drawing as you read about it in the text. The two ovaries are small, oval organs on either side of the uterus. Each ovary contains thousands of eggs, with about 1-2 million immature eggs present at birth and 40,000 immature eggs present at puberty, as most of the eggs die off. The eggs do not fully develop until a female has gone through puberty. About once a month, on average one egg completes development and is released by the ovary. The ovaries also secrete estrogen, the main female sex hormone. The two fallopian tubes are narrow tubes that open off from the uterus. Each tube reaches for one of the ovaries, but the tubes are not attached to the ovaries. The end of each fallopian tube by the ovary has fingers ( Figure 1.1). They sweep an egg into the fallopian tube. Then the egg passes through the fallopian tube to the uterus. If an egg is to be fertilized, this will occur in the fallopian tube. A fertilized egg then implants into the wall of the uterus, where it begins to develop. An unfertilized egg will flow through the uterus and be excreted from the body. 	a girl is born with over 1000000 immature eggs	true
Most of the male reproductive organs are outside of the body. But female reproductive organs are inside of the body. The male and female organs also look very different and have different jobs. Two of the functions of the female reproductive system are similar to the functions of the male reproductive system. The female system: 1. Produces gametes, the reproductive cells, which are called eggs in females. 2. Secretes a major sex hormone, estrogen. One of the main roles of the female reproductive system is to produce eggs. Eggs ( Figure 1.1) are female gametes, and they are made in the ovaries. After puberty, females release only one egg at a time. Eggs are actually made in the body before birth, but they do not fully develop until later in life. Like sperm, eggs are produced by meiosis, so they contain half the number of chromosomes as the original cell. Another role of the female system is to secrete estrogen. Estrogen is the main sex hormone in females. Estrogen has two major roles: 1. During the teen years, estrogen causes the reproductive organs to develop. It also causes other female traits to develop. For example, it causes the breasts to grow. 2. During adulthood, estrogen is needed for a woman to release eggs. On average, a woman releases one egg each month from her ovaries. The female reproductive system has another important function. After puberty, the female reproductive system must prepare itself to accept a fertilized egg each cycle (about every month). This cycle is controlled by a well-planned and very complex interplay of hormones. If an egg is not fertilized, the system must prepare itself again the next cycle. The female reproductive system also supports a baby as it develops before birth, and it facilitates the babys birth at the end of pregnancy. 	all of the eggs a woman will ever have are produced before birth	true
Most of the male reproductive organs are outside of the body. But female reproductive organs are inside of the body. The male and female organs also look very different and have different jobs. Two of the functions of the female reproductive system are similar to the functions of the male reproductive system. The female system: 1. Produces gametes, the reproductive cells, which are called eggs in females. 2. Secretes a major sex hormone, estrogen. One of the main roles of the female reproductive system is to produce eggs. Eggs ( Figure 1.1) are female gametes, and they are made in the ovaries. After puberty, females release only one egg at a time. Eggs are actually made in the body before birth, but they do not fully develop until later in life. Like sperm, eggs are produced by meiosis, so they contain half the number of chromosomes as the original cell. Another role of the female system is to secrete estrogen. Estrogen is the main sex hormone in females. Estrogen has two major roles: 1. During the teen years, estrogen causes the reproductive organs to develop. It also causes other female traits to develop. For example, it causes the breasts to grow. 2. During adulthood, estrogen is needed for a woman to release eggs. On average, a woman releases one egg each month from her ovaries. The female reproductive system has another important function. After puberty, the female reproductive system must prepare itself to accept a fertilized egg each cycle (about every month). This cycle is controlled by a well-planned and very complex interplay of hormones. If an egg is not fertilized, the system must prepare itself again the next cycle. The female reproductive system also supports a baby as it develops before birth, and it facilitates the babys birth at the end of pregnancy. 	the female reproductive system prepares itself every week to accept a fertilized egg	false
Sometimes cells need to obtain energy from sugar, but there is no oxygen present to complete cellular respiration. In this situation, cellular respiration can be anaerobic, occurring in the absence of oxygen. In this process, called fermentation, only the first step of respiration, glycolysis, occurs, producing two ATP; no additional ATP is produced. Therefore, the organism only obtains the two ATP molecules per glucose molecule from glycolysis. Compared to the 36-38 ATP produced under aerobic conditions, anaerobic respiration is not a very efficient process. Fermentation allows the first step of cellular respiration to continue and produce some ATP, even without oxygen. Yeast (single-celled eukaryotic organisms) perform alcoholic fermentation in the absence of oxygen. The products of alcoholic fermentation are ethyl alcohol (drinking alcohol) and carbon dioxide gas. This process is used to make common food and drinks. For example, alcoholic fermentation is used to bake bread. The carbon dioxide bubbles allow the bread to rise and become fluffy. Meanwhile, the alcohol evaporates. In wine making, the sugars of grapes are fermented to produce wine. The sugars are the starting materials for glycolysis. Animals and some bacteria and fungi carry out lactic acid fermentation. Lactic acid is a waste product of this process. Our muscles perform lactic acid fermentation during strenuous exercise, since oxygen cannot be delivered to the muscles quickly enough. The buildup of lactic acid is believed to make your muscles sore after exercise. Bacteria that produce lactic acid are used to make cheese and yogurt. The lactic acid causes the proteins in milk to thicken. Lactic acid also causes tooth decay, because bacteria use the sugars in your mouth for energy. Pictured below are some products of fermentation ( Figure 1.1). Products of fermentation include cheese (lactic acid fermentation) and wine (alco- holic fermentation). 	anaerobic respiration is less effective than aerobic respiration	true
Sometimes cells need to obtain energy from sugar, but there is no oxygen present to complete cellular respiration. In this situation, cellular respiration can be anaerobic, occurring in the absence of oxygen. In this process, called fermentation, only the first step of respiration, glycolysis, occurs, producing two ATP; no additional ATP is produced. Therefore, the organism only obtains the two ATP molecules per glucose molecule from glycolysis. Compared to the 36-38 ATP produced under aerobic conditions, anaerobic respiration is not a very efficient process. Fermentation allows the first step of cellular respiration to continue and produce some ATP, even without oxygen. Yeast (single-celled eukaryotic organisms) perform alcoholic fermentation in the absence of oxygen. The products of alcoholic fermentation are ethyl alcohol (drinking alcohol) and carbon dioxide gas. This process is used to make common food and drinks. For example, alcoholic fermentation is used to bake bread. The carbon dioxide bubbles allow the bread to rise and become fluffy. Meanwhile, the alcohol evaporates. In wine making, the sugars of grapes are fermented to produce wine. The sugars are the starting materials for glycolysis. Animals and some bacteria and fungi carry out lactic acid fermentation. Lactic acid is a waste product of this process. Our muscles perform lactic acid fermentation during strenuous exercise, since oxygen cannot be delivered to the muscles quickly enough. The buildup of lactic acid is believed to make your muscles sore after exercise. Bacteria that produce lactic acid are used to make cheese and yogurt. The lactic acid causes the proteins in milk to thicken. Lactic acid also causes tooth decay, because bacteria use the sugars in your mouth for energy. Pictured below are some products of fermentation ( Figure 1.1). Products of fermentation include cheese (lactic acid fermentation) and wine (alco- holic fermentation). 	in the absence of oxygen yeast make alcohol	true
In order to absorb oxygen from the water, fish use gills ( Figure 1.2). Gills take dissolved oxygen from water as the water flows over the surface of the gill. Gills help a fish breathe. 	whales are the biggest fish	false
In order to absorb oxygen from the water, fish use gills ( Figure 1.2). Gills take dissolved oxygen from water as the water flows over the surface of the gill. Gills help a fish breathe. 	some fish can live on land for short periods	true
The word "worm" is not very scientific. But it is a word that informally describes animals (usually invertebrates) that have long bodies with no arms or legs. (Snakes are vertebrates, so they are not usually described as worms.) Worms are the first significant group of animals with bilateral symmetry, meaning that the right side of their bodies is a mirror of the left. One type of worm is the flatworm. Worms in the phylum Platyhelminthes are called flatworms because they have flattened bodies. There are more than 18,500 known species of flatworms. 	the flatworms are the first significant phylum with bilateral symmetry	true
The word "worm" is not very scientific. But it is a word that informally describes animals (usually invertebrates) that have long bodies with no arms or legs. (Snakes are vertebrates, so they are not usually described as worms.) Worms are the first significant group of animals with bilateral symmetry, meaning that the right side of their bodies is a mirror of the left. One type of worm is the flatworm. Worms in the phylum Platyhelminthes are called flatworms because they have flattened bodies. There are more than 18,500 known species of flatworms. 	most flatworms are parasites	true
Did you ever hear the old saying, An apple a day keeps the doctor away? Do apples really prevent you from getting sick? Probably not, but eating apples and other fresh fruits can help keep you healthy. Do you eat your vegetables? Maybe you do, but you may have friends who wont touch a piece of broccoli or asparagus. Should you eat these foods and food like them? The girls pictured in the Figure 1.1 are eating salads. Why do you need foods like these for good health? What role does food play in the body? Your body needs food for three reasons: 1. Food gives your body energy. You need energy for everything you do. Remember that cellular respiration converts the glucose in the food you eat into ATP, or cellular energy. Which has more glucose, a salad or a piece of meat? Do you remember what types of foods produce glucose? Recall that glucose is the product of photosynthesis. These girls are eating leafy green vegetables. Fresh vegetables such as these are excellent food choices for good health. 2. Food provides building materials for your body. Your body needs building materials so it can grow and repair itself. Specifically, it needs these materials to produce more cells and its components. 3. Food contains substances that help control body processes. Your body processes must be kept in balance for good health. For all these reasons, you must have a regular supply of nutrients. Nutrients are chemicals in food that your body needs. There are five types of nutrients. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Carbohydrates Proteins Lipids Vitamins Minerals Carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids are categories of organic compounds. They give your body energy, though carbohydrates are the main source of energy. Proteins provide building materials, such as amino acids to build your own proteins. Proteins, vitamins, and minerals also help control body processes. Carbohydrates include sugars such as the glucose made by photosynthesis. Often glucose is stored in large molecules such as starch. Proteins are found in foods like meats and nuts. Lipids includes fats and oils. Though you should stay away from many types of fats, others are needed by your body. Important vitamins include vitamins A, B (multiple types) C, D, and E. Important minerals include calcium and potassium. What should you drink to get calcium? Milk is a good source. 	there are more carbohydrates in a salad than in a steak	true
Did you ever hear the old saying, An apple a day keeps the doctor away? Do apples really prevent you from getting sick? Probably not, but eating apples and other fresh fruits can help keep you healthy. Do you eat your vegetables? Maybe you do, but you may have friends who wont touch a piece of broccoli or asparagus. Should you eat these foods and food like them? The girls pictured in the Figure 1.1 are eating salads. Why do you need foods like these for good health? What role does food play in the body? Your body needs food for three reasons: 1. Food gives your body energy. You need energy for everything you do. Remember that cellular respiration converts the glucose in the food you eat into ATP, or cellular energy. Which has more glucose, a salad or a piece of meat? Do you remember what types of foods produce glucose? Recall that glucose is the product of photosynthesis. These girls are eating leafy green vegetables. Fresh vegetables such as these are excellent food choices for good health. 2. Food provides building materials for your body. Your body needs building materials so it can grow and repair itself. Specifically, it needs these materials to produce more cells and its components. 3. Food contains substances that help control body processes. Your body processes must be kept in balance for good health. For all these reasons, you must have a regular supply of nutrients. Nutrients are chemicals in food that your body needs. There are five types of nutrients. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Carbohydrates Proteins Lipids Vitamins Minerals Carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids are categories of organic compounds. They give your body energy, though carbohydrates are the main source of energy. Proteins provide building materials, such as amino acids to build your own proteins. Proteins, vitamins, and minerals also help control body processes. Carbohydrates include sugars such as the glucose made by photosynthesis. Often glucose is stored in large molecules such as starch. Proteins are found in foods like meats and nuts. Lipids includes fats and oils. Though you should stay away from many types of fats, others are needed by your body. Important vitamins include vitamins A, B (multiple types) C, D, and E. Important minerals include calcium and potassium. What should you drink to get calcium? Milk is a good source. 	the four types of nutrients are carbohydrates lipids proteins and nucleic acids	false
Fossils are the preserved remains of animals, plants, and other organisms from the distant past. Examples of fossils include bones, teeth, and impressions. By studying fossils, evidence for evolution is revealed. Paleontologists are scientists who study fossils to learn about life in the past. Fossils allow these scientists to determine the features of extinct species. Paleontologists compare the features of species from different periods in history. With this information, they try to understand how species have evolved over millions of years ( Figure below). Until recently, fossils were the main source of evidence for evolution ( Figure below). Through studying fossils, we now know that todays organisms look much different in many cases than those that were alive in the past. Scientists have also shown that organisms were spread out differently across the planet. Earthquakes, volcanoes, shifting seas, and other movements of the continents have all affected where organisms live and how they adapted to their changing environments. 	fossils are the preserved remains of animals plants and other organisms from the distant past	true
Fossils are the preserved remains of animals, plants, and other organisms from the distant past. Examples of fossils include bones, teeth, and impressions. By studying fossils, evidence for evolution is revealed. Paleontologists are scientists who study fossils to learn about life in the past. Fossils allow these scientists to determine the features of extinct species. Paleontologists compare the features of species from different periods in history. With this information, they try to understand how species have evolved over millions of years ( Figure below). Until recently, fossils were the main source of evidence for evolution ( Figure below). Through studying fossils, we now know that todays organisms look much different in many cases than those that were alive in the past. Scientists have also shown that organisms were spread out differently across the planet. Earthquakes, volcanoes, shifting seas, and other movements of the continents have all affected where organisms live and how they adapted to their changing environments. 	fossiltologists are scientists who study fossils to learn about life in the past	false
Huntingtons disease is an example of an autosomal dominant disorder. This means that if the dominant allele is present, then the person will express the disease. A child only has to inherit one dominant allele to have the disease. The disease causes the brains cells to break down, leading to muscle spasms and personality changes. Unlike most other genetic disorders, the symptoms usually do not become apparent until middle age. You can use a simple Punnett square to predict the inheritance of a dominant autosomal disorder, like Huntingtons disease. If one parent has Huntingtons disease, what is the chance of passing it on to the children? If you draw the Punnett square, you will find that there is a 50 percent chance of the disorder being passed on to the children. 	a genetic disorder is due to a mutation in your dna	true
Many genetic disorders are caused by mutations in one or a few genes. Others are caused by chromosomal mutations. Some human genetic disorders are X-linked or Y-linked, which means the faulty gene is carried on these sex chromosomes. Other genetic disorders are carried on one of the other 22 pairs of chromosomes; these chromosomes are known as autosomes or autosomal (non-sex) chromosomes. Some genetic disorders are due to new mutations, others can be inherited from your parents. 	genetic disorders are contagious	false
Sometimes understanding how common a gene is within a population is necessary. Or, more specifically, you may want to know how common a certain form of that gene is within the population, such as a recessive form. This can be done using the Hardy-Weinberg model, but it can only be done if the frequencies of the genes are not changing. The Hardy-Weinberg model describes how a population can remain at genetic equilibrium, referred to as the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Genetic equilibrium occurs when there is no evolution within the population. In other words, the frequency of alleles (variants of a gene) will be the same from one generation to another. At genetic equilibrium, the gene or allele frequencies are stablethey do not change. For example, lets assume that red hair is determined by the inheritance of a gene with two allelesR and r. The dominant allele, R, encodes for non-red hair, while the recessive allele, r, encodes for red hair. If a populations gene pool contains 90% R and 10% r alleles, then the next generation would also have 90% R and 10% r alleles. However, this only works under a strict set of conditions. The five conditions that must be met for genetic equilibrium to occur include: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. No mutation (change) in the DNA sequence. No migration (moving into or out of a population). A very large population size. Random mating. No natural selection. These five conditions rarely occur in nature. When one or more of the conditions does not exist, then evolution can occur. As a result, allele frequencies are constantly changing, and populations are constantly evolving. As mutations and natural selection occur frequently in nature, it is difficult for a population to be at genetic equilibrium. The Hardy-Weinberg model also serves a mathematical formula used to predict allele frequencies in a population at genetic equilibrium. If you know the allele frequencies of one generation, you can use this formula to predict the next generation. Again, this only works if all five conditions are being met in a population. 	at genetic equilibrium there is no evolution	true
Sometimes understanding how common a gene is within a population is necessary. Or, more specifically, you may want to know how common a certain form of that gene is within the population, such as a recessive form. This can be done using the Hardy-Weinberg model, but it can only be done if the frequencies of the genes are not changing. The Hardy-Weinberg model describes how a population can remain at genetic equilibrium, referred to as the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Genetic equilibrium occurs when there is no evolution within the population. In other words, the frequency of alleles (variants of a gene) will be the same from one generation to another. At genetic equilibrium, the gene or allele frequencies are stablethey do not change. For example, lets assume that red hair is determined by the inheritance of a gene with two allelesR and r. The dominant allele, R, encodes for non-red hair, while the recessive allele, r, encodes for red hair. If a populations gene pool contains 90% R and 10% r alleles, then the next generation would also have 90% R and 10% r alleles. However, this only works under a strict set of conditions. The five conditions that must be met for genetic equilibrium to occur include: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. No mutation (change) in the DNA sequence. No migration (moving into or out of a population). A very large population size. Random mating. No natural selection. These five conditions rarely occur in nature. When one or more of the conditions does not exist, then evolution can occur. As a result, allele frequencies are constantly changing, and populations are constantly evolving. As mutations and natural selection occur frequently in nature, it is difficult for a population to be at genetic equilibrium. The Hardy-Weinberg model also serves a mathematical formula used to predict allele frequencies in a population at genetic equilibrium. If you know the allele frequencies of one generation, you can use this formula to predict the next generation. Again, this only works if all five conditions are being met in a population. 	genetic equilibrium rarely occurs in nature	true
With so many species of bacteria, some are bound to be harmful. Harmful bacteria can make you sick. They can also ruin food and be used to hurt people. 	bacteria can be used as a weapon	true
With so many species of bacteria, some are bound to be harmful. Harmful bacteria can make you sick. They can also ruin food and be used to hurt people. 	bacteria are so small and there are so many that they cannot be killed	false
The World Health Organization (WHO) reports that 2.4 million people die each year from causes directly related to air pollution. This includes both outdoor and indoor air pollution. Worldwide, there are more deaths linked to air pollution each year than to car accidents. Research by the WHO also shows that the worst air quality is in countries with high poverty and population rates, such as Egypt, Sudan, Mongolia, and Indonesia. Respiratory system disorders are directly related to air pollution. These disorders have severe effects on human health, some leading to death directly related to air pollution. Air pollution related respiratory disorders include asthma, bronchitis, and emphysema. Asthma is a respiratory disorder characterized by wheezing, coughing, and a feeling of constriction in the chest. Bronchitis is inflammation of the membrane lining of the bronchial tubes of the lungs. Emphysema is a deadly lung disease characterized by abnormal enlargement of air spaces in the lungs and destruction of the lung tissue. Additional lung and heart diseases are also related to air pollution, as are respiratory allergies. Air pollution can also indirectly cause other health issues and even deaths. Air pollutants can cause an increase in cancer including lung cancer, eye problems, and other conditions. For example, using certain chemicals on farms, such as the insecticide DDT (dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane) and toxic PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyl), can cause cancer. Indoors, pollutants such as radon or asbestos can also increase your cancer risk. Lastly, air pollution can lead to heart disease, including heart attack and stroke. 	over two million people die each year from issues related to air pollution	true
After reading about the effects of air pollution, both indoors and outdoors, you may wonder how you can avoid it. As for outdoor air pollution, if you hear in the news that the outdoor air quality is particularly bad, then it might make sense to wear a mask outdoors or to stay indoors. Because you have more control over your indoor air quality than the outdoor air quality, there are some simple steps you can take indoors to make sure the air quality is less polluted. These include: 1. 2. 3. 4. Make sure that vents and chimneys are working properly, and never burn charcoal indoors. Place carbon monoxide detectors in the home. Keep your home as clean as possible from pet dander, dust, dust mites, and mold. Make sure air conditioning systems are working properly. Are there any other ways you can think of to protect yourself from air pollution? 	by using some precautions indoor air pollution can usually be controlled	true
Food allergies are like other allergies. They occur when the immune system reacts to harmless substances as though they were harmful. Almost ten percent of children have food allergies. Some of the foods most likely to cause allergies are shown below ( Figure 1.1). Eating foods you are allergic to may cause vomiting, diarrhea, or skin rashes. Some people are very allergic to certain foods. Eating even tiny amounts of the foods causes them to have serious symptoms, such as difficulty breathing. If they eat the foods by accident, they may need emergency medical treatment. Some of the foods that commonly cause allergies are shown here. They include nuts, eggs, grains, milk, and shellfish. Are you allergic to any of these foods? The most common food allergy symptoms include: tingling or itching in the mouth hives, itching or eczema, swelling of the lips, face, tongue and throat, or other parts of the body, wheezing, nasal congestion or trouble breathing, abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea or vomiting, dizziness, lightheadedness or fainting. In some people, a food allergy can trigger a severe allergic reaction called anaphylaxis. Emergency treatment is critical for anaphylaxis. Untreated, anaphylaxis can cause a coma or death. Anaphylaxis is vary rare. The vast majority of people will never have an anaphylactic reaction. The life-threatening symptoms of anaphylaxis include: constriction and tightening of the airway, a swollen throat or the sensation of a lump in your throat that makes it difficult to breathe, shock, with a severe drop in blood pressure, a rapid pulse, dizziness, lightheadedness or loss of consciousness. 	lots of people are allergic to shellfish	true
A food intolerance, or food sensitivity, is different from a food allergy. A food intolerance happens when the digestive system is unable to break down a certain type of food. This can result in stomach cramping, diarrhea, tiredness, and weight loss. Food intolerances are often mistakenly called allergies. Lactose intolerance is a food intolerance. A person who is lactose intolerant does not make enough lactase, the enzyme that breaks down the milk sugar, lactose. Lactose intolerance may be as high as 75% in some populations, but overall the percentage of affected individuals is much less. Still, well over 10% of the worlds population is lactose intolerant. 	well over 10 of the worlds population has problems digesting milk	true
What do listening to music and riding a bike have in common? It might surprise you to learn that both activities depend on your ears. The ears do more than just detect sound. They also sense the position of the body and help maintain balance. 	hearing is the ability to sense sound	true
What do listening to music and riding a bike have in common? It might surprise you to learn that both activities depend on your ears. The ears do more than just detect sound. They also sense the position of the body and help maintain balance. 	our ears interpret the sounds that we hear	false
What does the heart look like? How does it pump blood? The heart is divided into four chambers ( Figure 1.1), or spaces: the left and right atria, and the left and right ventricles. An atrium (singular for atria) is one of the two small, thin-walled chambers on the top of the heart where the blood first enters. A ventricle is one of the two muscular V-shaped chambers that pump blood out of the heart. You can remember they are called ventricles because they are shaped like a "V." The atria receive the blood, and the ventricles pump the blood out of the heart. Each of the four chambers of the heart has a specific job. The right atrium receives oxygen-poor blood from the body. The right ventricle pumps oxygen-poor blood toward the lungs, where it receives oxygen. The left atrium receives oxygen-rich blood from the lungs. The left ventricle pumps oxygen-rich blood out of the heart to the rest of the body. 	the ventricles are more muscular than the atria	true
Blood flows through the heart in two separate loops. You can think of them as a left side loop and a right side loop. The right side of the heart collects oxygen-poor blood from the body and pumps it into the lungs, where it releases carbon dioxide and picks up oxygen. (Recall that carbon dioxide is a waste product that must be removed. It is removed when we exhale.) The left side carries the oxygen-rich blood back from the lungs into the left side of the heart, which then pumps the oxygen-rich blood to the rest of the body. The blood delivers oxygen to the cells of the body, where it is needed for cellular respiration, and returns to the heart oxygen-poor. To move blood through the heart, the cardiac muscle needs to contract in an organized way. Blood first enters the atria ( Figure 1.2). When the atria contract, blood is pushed into the ventricles. After the ventricles fill with blood, they contract, and blood is pushed out of the heart. The heart is mainly composed of cardiac muscle. These muscle cells contract in unison, causing the heart itself to contract and generating enough force to push the blood out. So how is the blood kept from flowing back on itself? Valves ( Figure 1.2) in the heart keep the blood flowing in one direction. The valves do this by opening and closing in one direction only. Blood only moves forward through the heart. The valves stop the blood from flowing backward. There are four valves of the heart. The two atrioventricular (AV) valves stop blood from moving from the ventricles to the atria. The two semilunar (SL) valves are found in the arteries leaving the heart, and they prevent blood from flowing back from the arteries into the ventricles. Why does a heart beat? The lub-dub sound of the heartbeat is caused by the closing of the AV valves ("lub") and SL valves ("dub") after blood has passed through them. 	valves in the heart keep the blood flowing in one direction	true
Can we survive without bacteria? Could bacteria survive without us? No and yes. No, we could not survive without bacteria. And yes, bacteria could survive without us. 	we need bacteria to survive	true
Can we survive without bacteria? Could bacteria survive without us? No and yes. No, we could not survive without bacteria. And yes, bacteria could survive without us. 	in your gut bacteria cells outnumber your own cells	true
HIV, or human immunodeficiency virus, causes AIDS. AIDS stands for "acquired immune deficiency syndrome." It is a condition that causes death and does not have a known cure. AIDS usually develops 10 to 15 years after a person is first infected with HIV. The development of AIDS can be delayed with proper medicines. The delay can be well over 20 years with the right medicines. Today, individuals who acquire HIV after 50 years of age can expect to reach an average human life span. 	the development of aids can be delayed by well over 20 years with proper medicines	true
HIV, or human immunodeficiency virus, causes AIDS. AIDS stands for "acquired immune deficiency syndrome." It is a condition that causes death and does not have a known cure. AIDS usually develops 10 to 15 years after a person is first infected with HIV. The development of AIDS can be delayed with proper medicines. The delay can be well over 20 years with the right medicines. Today, individuals who acquire HIV after 50 years of age can expect to reach an average human life span. 	hiv spreads through kissing	false
When you walk outside on a cool day, does your body temperature drop? No, your body temperature stays stable at around 98.6 degrees Fahrenheit. Even when the temperature around you changes, your internal temperature stays the same. This ability of the body to maintain a stable internal environment despite a changing environment is called home- ostasis. Homeostasis doesnt just protect against temperature changes. Other aspects of your internal environment also stay stable. For example, your body closely regulates your fluid balance. You may have noticed that if you are slightly dehydrated, your urine is darker. Thats because the urine is more concentrated and less water is mixed in with it. 	your body temperature drops on a cold day	false
When you walk outside on a cool day, does your body temperature drop? No, your body temperature stays stable at around 98.6 degrees Fahrenheit. Even when the temperature around you changes, your internal temperature stays the same. This ability of the body to maintain a stable internal environment despite a changing environment is called home- ostasis. Homeostasis doesnt just protect against temperature changes. Other aspects of your internal environment also stay stable. For example, your body closely regulates your fluid balance. You may have noticed that if you are slightly dehydrated, your urine is darker. Thats because the urine is more concentrated and less water is mixed in with it. 	your body temperature always tries to be around 986 degrees fahrenheit even if it is very hot outside	true
Carbon is one of the most common elements found in living organisms. Chains of carbon molecules form the backbones of many organic molecules, such as carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids. Carbon is constantly cycling between living organisms and the atmosphere ( Figure 1.1). The cycling of carbon occurs through the carbon cycle. Living organisms cannot make their own carbon, so how is carbon incorporated into living organisms? In the atmosphere, carbon is in the form of carbon dioxide gas (CO2 ). Recall that plants and other producers capture the carbon dioxide and convert it to glucose (C6 H12 O6 ) through the process of photosynthesis. Then as animals eat plants or other animals, they gain the carbon from those organisms. The chemical equation of photosynthesis is 6CO2 + 6H2 O  C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 . How does this carbon in living things end up back in the atmosphere? Remember that we breathe out carbon dioxide. This carbon dioxide is generated through the process of cellular respiration, which has the reverse chemical reaction as photosynthesis. That means when our cells burn food (glucose) for energy, carbon dioxide is released. We, like all animals, exhale this carbon dioxide and return it back to the atmosphere. Also, carbon is released to the atmosphere as an organism dies and decomposes. Cellular respiration and photosynthesis can be described as a cycle, as one uses carbon dioxide (and water) and makes oxygen (and glucose), and the other uses oxygen (and glucose) and makes carbon dioxide (and water). The carbon cycle. The cycling of carbon dioxide in photosynthesis and cellular res- piration are main components of the car- bon cycle. Carbon is also returned to the atmosphere by the burning of fossil fuels and decomposition of organic matter. 	the job of the eye is to focus light	true
Carbon is one of the most common elements found in living organisms. Chains of carbon molecules form the backbones of many organic molecules, such as carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids. Carbon is constantly cycling between living organisms and the atmosphere ( Figure 1.1). The cycling of carbon occurs through the carbon cycle. Living organisms cannot make their own carbon, so how is carbon incorporated into living organisms? In the atmosphere, carbon is in the form of carbon dioxide gas (CO2 ). Recall that plants and other producers capture the carbon dioxide and convert it to glucose (C6 H12 O6 ) through the process of photosynthesis. Then as animals eat plants or other animals, they gain the carbon from those organisms. The chemical equation of photosynthesis is 6CO2 + 6H2 O  C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 . How does this carbon in living things end up back in the atmosphere? Remember that we breathe out carbon dioxide. This carbon dioxide is generated through the process of cellular respiration, which has the reverse chemical reaction as photosynthesis. That means when our cells burn food (glucose) for energy, carbon dioxide is released. We, like all animals, exhale this carbon dioxide and return it back to the atmosphere. Also, carbon is released to the atmosphere as an organism dies and decomposes. Cellular respiration and photosynthesis can be described as a cycle, as one uses carbon dioxide (and water) and makes oxygen (and glucose), and the other uses oxygen (and glucose) and makes carbon dioxide (and water). The carbon cycle. The cycling of carbon dioxide in photosynthesis and cellular res- piration are main components of the car- bon cycle. Carbon is also returned to the atmosphere by the burning of fossil fuels and decomposition of organic matter. 	light is focused on the lens of the eye	false
In addition to habitat destruction, other human-caused problems are also threatening many species. These include issues associated with climate change, pollution, and over-population. 	most current species extinction is because of humans	true
In addition to habitat destruction, other human-caused problems are also threatening many species. These include issues associated with climate change, pollution, and over-population. 	the size of the human population creates many issues relating to the survival of other species	true
Nutrients in the foods you eat are needed by the cells of your body. How do the nutrients in foods get to your body cells? What organs and processes break down the foods and make the nutrients available to cells? The organs are those of the digestive system. The processes are digestion and absorption. The digestive system is the body system that breaks down food and absorbs nutrients. It also gets rid of solid food waste. The digestive system is mainly one long tube from the mouth to the anus, known as the gastrointestinal tract (GI tract). The main organs of the digestive system include the esophagus, stomach and the intestine, and are pictured below ( Figure 1.1). The intestine is divided into the small and large intestine. The small intestine has three segments. The ileum is the longest segment of the small intestine, which is well over 10 feet long. The large intestine is about 5 feet long. This drawing shows the major organs of the digestive system. The liver, pancreas and gallbladder are also organs of the digestive system. Digestion is the process of breaking down food into nutrients. There are two types of digestion, mechanical and chemical. In mechanical digestion, large chunks of food are broken down into small pieces. Mechanical digestion begins in the mouth and involves physical processes, such as chewing. This process continues in the stomach as the food is mixed with digestive juices. In chemical digestion, large food molecules are broken down into small nutrient molecules. This is a chemical process which also begins in the mouth as saliva begins to break down food and continues in the stomach as stomach enzymes further digest the food. Absorption is the process that allows substances you eat to be taken up by the blood. After food is broken down into small nutrient molecules, the molecules are absorbed by the blood. After absorption, the nutrient molecules travel in the bloodstream to cells throughout the body. This happens mostly in the small intestine. Some substances in food cannot be broken down into nutrients. They remain behind in the digestive system after the nutrients are absorbed. Any substances in food that cannot be digested and absorbed pass out of the body as solid waste. The process of passing solid food waste out of the body is called elimination. 	chewing your food is the start of digestion	true
Nutrients in the foods you eat are needed by the cells of your body. How do the nutrients in foods get to your body cells? What organs and processes break down the foods and make the nutrients available to cells? The organs are those of the digestive system. The processes are digestion and absorption. The digestive system is the body system that breaks down food and absorbs nutrients. It also gets rid of solid food waste. The digestive system is mainly one long tube from the mouth to the anus, known as the gastrointestinal tract (GI tract). The main organs of the digestive system include the esophagus, stomach and the intestine, and are pictured below ( Figure 1.1). The intestine is divided into the small and large intestine. The small intestine has three segments. The ileum is the longest segment of the small intestine, which is well over 10 feet long. The large intestine is about 5 feet long. This drawing shows the major organs of the digestive system. The liver, pancreas and gallbladder are also organs of the digestive system. Digestion is the process of breaking down food into nutrients. There are two types of digestion, mechanical and chemical. In mechanical digestion, large chunks of food are broken down into small pieces. Mechanical digestion begins in the mouth and involves physical processes, such as chewing. This process continues in the stomach as the food is mixed with digestive juices. In chemical digestion, large food molecules are broken down into small nutrient molecules. This is a chemical process which also begins in the mouth as saliva begins to break down food and continues in the stomach as stomach enzymes further digest the food. Absorption is the process that allows substances you eat to be taken up by the blood. After food is broken down into small nutrient molecules, the molecules are absorbed by the blood. After absorption, the nutrient molecules travel in the bloodstream to cells throughout the body. This happens mostly in the small intestine. Some substances in food cannot be broken down into nutrients. They remain behind in the digestive system after the nutrients are absorbed. Any substances in food that cannot be digested and absorbed pass out of the body as solid waste. The process of passing solid food waste out of the body is called elimination. 	absorption of nutrients from food occurs in the stomach	false
A persons genome is all of his or her genetic information. In other words, the human genome is all the information that makes us human. And unless you have an identical twin, your genome is unique. No one else has a genome just like yours, though all our genomes are similar. The Human Genome Project ( Figure 1.1) was an international effort to sequence all 3 billion bases that make up our DNA and to identify within this code more than 20,000 human genes. Scientists also completed a chromosome map, identifying where the genes are located on each of the chromosomes. The Human Genome Project was completed in 2003. Though the Human Genome Project is finished, analysis of the data will continue for many years. To say the Human Genome Project has been beneficial to mankind would be an understatement. Exciting applications of the Human Genome Project include the following: The genetic basis for many diseases can be more easily determined. Now there are tests for over 1,000 genetic disorders. The technologies developed during this effort, and since the completion of this project, will reduce the cost of sequencing a persons genome. This may eventually allow many people to sequence their individual genome. Analysis of your own genome could determine if you are at risk for specific diseases. Knowing you might be genetically prone to a certain disease would allow you to make preventive lifestyle changes or have medical screenings. To complete the Human Genome Project, all 23 pairs of chromosomes in the human body were sequenced. Each chromo- some contains thousands of genes. This is a karyotype, a visual representation of an individuals chromosomes lined up by size. The video Our Molecular Selves discusses the human genome, and is available at  or  . Genome, Unlocking Lifes Code is the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural Historys exhibit on the human genome. See http://unlockinglifescode.org to visit the exhibit. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	your genome is all of your genetic information	true
A persons genome is all of his or her genetic information. In other words, the human genome is all the information that makes us human. And unless you have an identical twin, your genome is unique. No one else has a genome just like yours, though all our genomes are similar. The Human Genome Project ( Figure 1.1) was an international effort to sequence all 3 billion bases that make up our DNA and to identify within this code more than 20,000 human genes. Scientists also completed a chromosome map, identifying where the genes are located on each of the chromosomes. The Human Genome Project was completed in 2003. Though the Human Genome Project is finished, analysis of the data will continue for many years. To say the Human Genome Project has been beneficial to mankind would be an understatement. Exciting applications of the Human Genome Project include the following: The genetic basis for many diseases can be more easily determined. Now there are tests for over 1,000 genetic disorders. The technologies developed during this effort, and since the completion of this project, will reduce the cost of sequencing a persons genome. This may eventually allow many people to sequence their individual genome. Analysis of your own genome could determine if you are at risk for specific diseases. Knowing you might be genetically prone to a certain disease would allow you to make preventive lifestyle changes or have medical screenings. To complete the Human Genome Project, all 23 pairs of chromosomes in the human body were sequenced. Each chromo- some contains thousands of genes. This is a karyotype, a visual representation of an individuals chromosomes lined up by size. The video Our Molecular Selves discusses the human genome, and is available at  or  . Genome, Unlocking Lifes Code is the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural Historys exhibit on the human genome. See http://unlockinglifescode.org to visit the exhibit. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	all the bases that make up the human genome have been sequenced	true
How quickly is the human population growing? If we look at worldwide human population growth from 10,000 BCE through today, our growth looks like exponential growth. It increased very slowly at first, but later grew faster and faster as the population increased in size ( Figure 1.1). And recently, the human population has increased at a faster pace than ever before. It has taken only 12 years for the worlds population to increase from six billion to seven billion. Considering that in the year 1804, there were just one billion people, and in 1927, there were just two billion people (thats 123 years to increase from 1 to 2 billion), the recent increase in the human population growth rate is characteristic of exponential growth. Does this mean there are unlimited resources? Worldwide human population growth from 10,000 BCE through today. 	planet earth has unlimited resources	false
How quickly is the human population growing? If we look at worldwide human population growth from 10,000 BCE through today, our growth looks like exponential growth. It increased very slowly at first, but later grew faster and faster as the population increased in size ( Figure 1.1). And recently, the human population has increased at a faster pace than ever before. It has taken only 12 years for the worlds population to increase from six billion to seven billion. Considering that in the year 1804, there were just one billion people, and in 1927, there were just two billion people (thats 123 years to increase from 1 to 2 billion), the recent increase in the human population growth rate is characteristic of exponential growth. Does this mean there are unlimited resources? Worldwide human population growth from 10,000 BCE through today. 	the human population is running out of resources so it shows logistic growth	false
How important is your skeleton? Can you imagine your body without it? You would be a wobbly pile of muscle and internal organs, and you would not be able to move. The adult human skeleton has 206 bones, some of which are named below ( Figure 1.1). Bones are made up of living tissue. They contain many different types of tissues. Cartilage, a dense connective tissue, is found at the end of bones and is made of tough protein fibers. Cartilage creates smooth surfaces for the movement of bones that are next to each other, like the bones of the knee. Ligaments are made of tough protein fibers and connect bones to each other. Your bones, cartilage, and ligaments make up your skeletal system. 	bones are made of cartilage and ligaments	false
How important is your skeleton? Can you imagine your body without it? You would be a wobbly pile of muscle and internal organs, and you would not be able to move. The adult human skeleton has 206 bones, some of which are named below ( Figure 1.1). Bones are made up of living tissue. They contain many different types of tissues. Cartilage, a dense connective tissue, is found at the end of bones and is made of tough protein fibers. Cartilage creates smooth surfaces for the movement of bones that are next to each other, like the bones of the knee. Ligaments are made of tough protein fibers and connect bones to each other. Your bones, cartilage, and ligaments make up your skeletal system. 	ligaments create smooth surfaces for the movement of bones	false
Can you avoid indoor air pollution? You cant go to school outside. But it is possible to reduce your exposure to air pollution. Some tips to decrease your exposure to indoor air pollution include: Using less toxic chemicals when possible. Limiting your exposure to pesticides and cleaning fluids by keeping them in a garage or shed. When using toxic chemicals, allowing fresh air to circulate through open windows and doors. Having detectors for radon and carbon monoxide in your home. What else could you do to reduce your exposure to air pollution? 	sealing up your home keeps air pollution out	false
Recall that air pollution is due to chemical substances and particles released into the air mainly by human actions. When most people think of air pollution, they think of the pollution outdoors. But it is just as easy to have indoor air pollution. Your home or school classroom probably doesnt get much fresh air. Sealing up your home reduces heating and cooling costs. But this also causes air pollution to stay trapped indoors. And people today usually spend a majority of their time indoors. So exposure to indoor air pollution can become a significant health risk. Indoor air pollutants include both chemical and biological pollutants. Chemical pollutants include the following: Radon, a radioactive gas released from the Earth in certain locations. It can become trapped inside buildings and increase your risk of cancer. Formaldehyde, a toxic gas emitted from building materials, such as carpeting and plywood. Volatile organic compounds (VOCs), which are given off by paint and solvents as they dry. They can cause cause long-term health effects. Secondhand smoke, which comes from breathing the smoke release from tobacco products. Secondhand smoke is also the smoke exhaled by a cigarette smoker. This smoke is extremely dangerous to human health. Carbon monoxide (CO), a toxic gas released by burning fossil fuels. It is often released indoors by faulty chimneys, gas-powered generators, or burning charcoal; it can be extremely dangerous. Dry cleaning fluids, such as tetrachloroethylene, which can be released from clothing days after dry cleaning. The past use of asbestos in factories and in homes. Asbestos is a very dangerous material, and it was used in many buildings ( Figure 1.1). Asbestos can cause cancer and other lung diseases. The use of asbestos is not allowed today. The use of asbestos in industry and do- mestic environments in the past, as in the asbestos-covered pipes in the oil-refining plant pictured here, has left a potentially very dangerous material in many busi- nesses. Biological sources of air pollution are also found indoors. These are produced from: Pet dander. Dust from tiny skin flakes and decomposed hair. Dust mites. Mold from walls, ceilings, and other structures. Air conditioning systems that can incubate certain bacteria and mold. Pollen, dust, and mold from houseplants, soil, and surrounding gardens. 	secondhand smoke can cause severe health issues	true
The first year after birth is called infancy. Infancy is a period when the baby grows very fast. During infancy, the baby doubles in length and triples in weight. Other important changes also happen during infancy: The babys teeth start to come in, usually at about six months of age ( Figure 1.1). The baby starts smiling, paying attention to other people, and grabbing toys. The baby begins making babbling sounds. By the end of the first year, the baby is starting to say a few words, such as mama and dada. The baby learns to sit, crawl, and stand. By the end of the first year, the baby may be starting to walk. Childhood begins after the babys first birthday and continues until the teen years. Between one and three years of age, a child is called a toddler. During the toddler stage, growth is still fast, but not as fast as it was during infancy. A toddler learns many new words. The child even starts putting together words in simple sentences. Motor skills also develop quickly during this stage. By age three, most children can run and climb steps. They can hold crayons and scribble with them. They can also feed themselves and use the toilet. From age three until the teens, growth is slower. The body also changes shape. The arms and legs get longer compared to the trunk. Children continue to develop new motor skills. For example, many young children learn how to ride a tricycle and then a bicycle. Most also learn how to play games and sports ( Figure 1.2). By age six, children start losing their baby teeth. Their permanent teeth begin coming in to replace them. They also start school and learn how to read and write. They develop friendships and become less dependent on their parents. 	babies grow fastest during the first year of life	true
The first year after birth is called infancy. Infancy is a period when the baby grows very fast. During infancy, the baby doubles in length and triples in weight. Other important changes also happen during infancy: The babys teeth start to come in, usually at about six months of age ( Figure 1.1). The baby starts smiling, paying attention to other people, and grabbing toys. The baby begins making babbling sounds. By the end of the first year, the baby is starting to say a few words, such as mama and dada. The baby learns to sit, crawl, and stand. By the end of the first year, the baby may be starting to walk. Childhood begins after the babys first birthday and continues until the teen years. Between one and three years of age, a child is called a toddler. During the toddler stage, growth is still fast, but not as fast as it was during infancy. A toddler learns many new words. The child even starts putting together words in simple sentences. Motor skills also develop quickly during this stage. By age three, most children can run and climb steps. They can hold crayons and scribble with them. They can also feed themselves and use the toilet. From age three until the teens, growth is slower. The body also changes shape. The arms and legs get longer compared to the trunk. Children continue to develop new motor skills. For example, many young children learn how to ride a tricycle and then a bicycle. Most also learn how to play games and sports ( Figure 1.2). By age six, children start losing their baby teeth. Their permanent teeth begin coming in to replace them. They also start school and learn how to read and write. They develop friendships and become less dependent on their parents. 	a baby must be able to walk to be a toddler	false
When Darwin returned to England five years later, in 1836, at the end of his voyage, he did not rush to announce his discoveries. Unlike other naturalists before him, Darwin did not want to present any ideas unless he had strong evidence supporting them. Instead, once Darwin returned to England, he spent over twenty years examining specimens, talking with other scientists and collecting more information before he presented his theories. Some of Darwins ideas conflicted with widely held beliefs, including those from religious leaders. At that time, many people believed that organisms never change and never go extinct, and that the world was only about 6,000 years old, always existing in the same way, never changing. These beliefs delayed Darwin in presenting his findings. How did Darwin come up with his theories? Charles Darwin was influenced by the ideas of several people. 1. Before the voyage of the Beagle, Jean-Baptiste Lamarck proposed the idea that species change over time. However, Darwin differed with Lamarck on several key points. Lamarck proposed that traits acquired during ones lifetime could be passed to the next generation. Darwin did not agree with this. 2. The findings of Charles Lyell, a well-known geologist, also influenced Darwin. Lyells writings taught Darwin about geology, paleontology, and the changing Earth. Lyells findings suggested the Earth must be much older than 6,000 years. And the evolution of life, as Darwin was developing his ideas, would definitely take much longer than just 6,000 years. During the Voyage of the Beagle, Darwin observed fossils of sea life high up in the mountains. What must happen to the Earth for this to occur? Darwin, using the readings of Lyell, took this as evidence of a constantly changing Earth. 3. After the Voyage of the Beagle, another naturalist, Alfred Russel Wallace ( Figure 1.1), developed a similar theory of evolution by natural selection. Wallace toured South America and made similar observations to Darwins. Darwin and Wallace presented their theories and evidence in public together. Due to the large number of observations and conclusions he made, Darwin is mostly credited and associated with this theory. Alfred Wallace developed a similar theory of evolution by natural selection. Imagine developing a theory that conflicted with widely held beliefs of the time, as Darwin did. Imagine pulling together material from all these different people, adding his own findings, and turning it all into his theory. Imag- ine the torment Darwin must have endured during this time, knowing the skepticism that would follow the release of his findings. But, upon his death, Darwin was given one of the highest honors in England. Darwin is buried in Westminster Abbey, the final resting place of many of Englands kings and queens. Why was he buried in such an important spot? 	prior to darwin many people believed earth was only about 6000 years old	true
When Darwin returned to England five years later, in 1836, at the end of his voyage, he did not rush to announce his discoveries. Unlike other naturalists before him, Darwin did not want to present any ideas unless he had strong evidence supporting them. Instead, once Darwin returned to England, he spent over twenty years examining specimens, talking with other scientists and collecting more information before he presented his theories. Some of Darwins ideas conflicted with widely held beliefs, including those from religious leaders. At that time, many people believed that organisms never change and never go extinct, and that the world was only about 6,000 years old, always existing in the same way, never changing. These beliefs delayed Darwin in presenting his findings. How did Darwin come up with his theories? Charles Darwin was influenced by the ideas of several people. 1. Before the voyage of the Beagle, Jean-Baptiste Lamarck proposed the idea that species change over time. However, Darwin differed with Lamarck on several key points. Lamarck proposed that traits acquired during ones lifetime could be passed to the next generation. Darwin did not agree with this. 2. The findings of Charles Lyell, a well-known geologist, also influenced Darwin. Lyells writings taught Darwin about geology, paleontology, and the changing Earth. Lyells findings suggested the Earth must be much older than 6,000 years. And the evolution of life, as Darwin was developing his ideas, would definitely take much longer than just 6,000 years. During the Voyage of the Beagle, Darwin observed fossils of sea life high up in the mountains. What must happen to the Earth for this to occur? Darwin, using the readings of Lyell, took this as evidence of a constantly changing Earth. 3. After the Voyage of the Beagle, another naturalist, Alfred Russel Wallace ( Figure 1.1), developed a similar theory of evolution by natural selection. Wallace toured South America and made similar observations to Darwins. Darwin and Wallace presented their theories and evidence in public together. Due to the large number of observations and conclusions he made, Darwin is mostly credited and associated with this theory. Alfred Wallace developed a similar theory of evolution by natural selection. Imagine developing a theory that conflicted with widely held beliefs of the time, as Darwin did. Imagine pulling together material from all these different people, adding his own findings, and turning it all into his theory. Imag- ine the torment Darwin must have endured during this time, knowing the skepticism that would follow the release of his findings. But, upon his death, Darwin was given one of the highest honors in England. Darwin is buried in Westminster Abbey, the final resting place of many of Englands kings and queens. Why was he buried in such an important spot? 	many people believed that organisms never change and never go extinct	true
Injuries to the central nervous system may damage tissues of the brain or spinal cord. If an injury is mild, a person may have a full recovery. If an injury is severe, it may cause permanent disability or even death. Brain and spinal cord injuries most commonly occur because of car crashes or sports accidents. The best way to deal with such injuries is to try to prevent them. 	if you think someone has a spinal cord injury take him or her to the hospital as fast as possible	false
Injuries to the central nervous system may damage tissues of the brain or spinal cord. If an injury is mild, a person may have a full recovery. If an injury is severe, it may cause permanent disability or even death. Brain and spinal cord injuries most commonly occur because of car crashes or sports accidents. The best way to deal with such injuries is to try to prevent them. 	if someone loses consciousness chances are they have a brain injury	true
Most scientists agree that the jawless fish are part of the the superclass Agnatha. They belong to the phylum Chordata, subphylum Vertebrata. There are two living groups of jawless fish, with about 100 species in total: lampreys and hagfish ( Figure 1.1). Although hagfish belong to the subphylum Vertebrata, they do not technically have vertebrae (though they do have a skull), whereas lampreys do have vertebrae. For this reason, scientists still disagree on the classification of jawless fish. A hagfish. 	jawless fish were the first fish to evolve	true
Most scientists agree that the jawless fish are part of the the superclass Agnatha. They belong to the phylum Chordata, subphylum Vertebrata. There are two living groups of jawless fish, with about 100 species in total: lampreys and hagfish ( Figure 1.1). Although hagfish belong to the subphylum Vertebrata, they do not technically have vertebrae (though they do have a skull), whereas lampreys do have vertebrae. For this reason, scientists still disagree on the classification of jawless fish. A hagfish. 	both groups of jawless fish have a notochord	true
You can help keep your bones and skeletal system healthy by eating well and getting enough exercise. Weight- bearing exercises help keep bones strong. Weight-bearing exercises and activities work against gravity. Such activities include basketball, tennis, gymnastics, karate, running, and walking. When the body is exercised regularly by performing weight-bearing activity, bones respond by adding more bone cells to increase their bone density. 	when the body is exercised regularly by performing weightbearing activity bones add bone cells to increase their bone density	true
Osteoarthritis occurs when the cartilage at the ends of the bones breaks down. The break down of the cartilage leads to pain and stiffness in the joint. Decreased movement of the joint because of the pain may lead to weakening of the muscles that normally move the joint, and the ligaments surrounding the joint may become loose. Osteoarthritis is the most common form of arthritis. It has many contributing factors, including aging, sport injuries, fractures, and obesity. 	bones can break in the same way a pencil breaks when bent	true
Your skin is your largest organ and constantly protects you from infections, so keeping your skin healthy is a good idea. 	your skin constantly protects you from infections	true
Your skin is your largest organ and constantly protects you from infections, so keeping your skin healthy is a good idea. 	your skin makes vitamins like vitamins a b c and d	false
The nervous system is such an important part of your body. You want it to work at its best so that you can be at your best. Your nervous system contains what is probably the most important part of your body, which, of course, is your brain. Your brain allows you to learn. It allows you to feel emotions like love, anger, and sadness. Your brain gives you the ability to see, hear, taste, touch, and smell. It works together with the nerves and spinal cord to send the signals that make your body move. Your nervous system lets you do things like run, jump, play sports, and do your homework. There are many choices you can make to keep your nervous system healthy. One obvious choice is to avoid using alcohol or other drugs. Not only will you avoid the injury that drugs themselves can cause, but you will also be less likely to get involved in other risky behaviors that could harm your nervous system. Another way to keep the nervous system healthy is to eat a variety of healthy foods. The minerals sodium, calcium, and potassium, and vitamins B1 and B12 are important for a healthy nervous system. Some foods that are good sources for these minerals and vitamins include milk, whole grains, beef steak, and kidney beans (shown in Figure 1.1). Your brain also needs healthy fats like those in nuts and fish. Recall that fats insulate the axons of neurons. These fats help build new connections between nerves and brain cells. These fats may improve memory and increase learning and intelligence. Water is also important for the nervous system, so drink plenty of water and other fluids. This helps prevent dehydration, which can cause confusion and memory problems. And get plenty of rest. Your brain requires plenty of rest so it can strengthen circuits that help with memory. A good nights sleep will help keep your brain functioning at its best. These foods are sources of nutrients needed for a healthy nervous system. Daily physical activity is also important for nervous system health. Regular exercise makes your heart more efficient at pumping blood to your brain. As a result, your brain gets more oxygen, which it needs to function normally. The saying use it or lose it applies to your brain as well as your body. This means that mental activity, not just physical activity, is important for nervous system health. Doing crossword puzzles, reading, and playing a musical instrument are just a few ways you can keep your brain active. You can also choose to practice safe behaviors to protect your nervous system from injury. To keep your nervous system safe, choose to: Bicycle helmets help protect from head injuries. Making healthy choices like this can help prevent nervous system injuries that could cause lifelong disability. Furthermore, make sure to exercise your nervous system on a daily basis. The simple act of writing requires that you use all the major components of your motor and sensory pathways. These include a number of different sensory receptors, peripheral nerves, synaptic connections within your spinal cord, major tracts within your spinal cord, and nerve tissue throughout your brain. All these components need to be utilized with great precision and coordination to produce neatly written words. What should you do? Spend a few minutes each day writing on paper as neatly as you can. This takes a lot more effort on the part of the nervous system than typing on a keyboard, as typing on a keyboard doesnt require as much fine motor control as writing on paper. If you dont want to write, then draw. Drawing with precision also requires use of all the major components of the sensory and motor divisions of the nervous system. 	your brain needs to be exercised to stay healthy	true
The nervous system is such an important part of your body. You want it to work at its best so that you can be at your best. Your nervous system contains what is probably the most important part of your body, which, of course, is your brain. Your brain allows you to learn. It allows you to feel emotions like love, anger, and sadness. Your brain gives you the ability to see, hear, taste, touch, and smell. It works together with the nerves and spinal cord to send the signals that make your body move. Your nervous system lets you do things like run, jump, play sports, and do your homework. There are many choices you can make to keep your nervous system healthy. One obvious choice is to avoid using alcohol or other drugs. Not only will you avoid the injury that drugs themselves can cause, but you will also be less likely to get involved in other risky behaviors that could harm your nervous system. Another way to keep the nervous system healthy is to eat a variety of healthy foods. The minerals sodium, calcium, and potassium, and vitamins B1 and B12 are important for a healthy nervous system. Some foods that are good sources for these minerals and vitamins include milk, whole grains, beef steak, and kidney beans (shown in Figure 1.1). Your brain also needs healthy fats like those in nuts and fish. Recall that fats insulate the axons of neurons. These fats help build new connections between nerves and brain cells. These fats may improve memory and increase learning and intelligence. Water is also important for the nervous system, so drink plenty of water and other fluids. This helps prevent dehydration, which can cause confusion and memory problems. And get plenty of rest. Your brain requires plenty of rest so it can strengthen circuits that help with memory. A good nights sleep will help keep your brain functioning at its best. These foods are sources of nutrients needed for a healthy nervous system. Daily physical activity is also important for nervous system health. Regular exercise makes your heart more efficient at pumping blood to your brain. As a result, your brain gets more oxygen, which it needs to function normally. The saying use it or lose it applies to your brain as well as your body. This means that mental activity, not just physical activity, is important for nervous system health. Doing crossword puzzles, reading, and playing a musical instrument are just a few ways you can keep your brain active. You can also choose to practice safe behaviors to protect your nervous system from injury. To keep your nervous system safe, choose to: Bicycle helmets help protect from head injuries. Making healthy choices like this can help prevent nervous system injuries that could cause lifelong disability. Furthermore, make sure to exercise your nervous system on a daily basis. The simple act of writing requires that you use all the major components of your motor and sensory pathways. These include a number of different sensory receptors, peripheral nerves, synaptic connections within your spinal cord, major tracts within your spinal cord, and nerve tissue throughout your brain. All these components need to be utilized with great precision and coordination to produce neatly written words. What should you do? Spend a few minutes each day writing on paper as neatly as you can. This takes a lot more effort on the part of the nervous system than typing on a keyboard, as typing on a keyboard doesnt require as much fine motor control as writing on paper. If you dont want to write, then draw. Drawing with precision also requires use of all the major components of the sensory and motor divisions of the nervous system. 	there are fats that are good for your brain	true
The kidneys ( Figure 1.1) are important organs in maintaining homeostasis, the ability of the body to maintain a stable internal environment despite a changing environment. Kidneys perform a number of homeostatic functions. They maintain the volume of body fluids. They maintain the balance of salt ions in body fluids. They excrete harmful nitrogen-containing molecules, such as urea, ammonia, and uric acid. There are many blood vessels in the kidneys ( Figure 1.1). The kidneys remove urea and other wastes from the blood through tiny filtering units called nephrons. Nephrons ( Figure 1.2) are tiny, tube-shaped structures found inside each kidney. Each kidney has up to a million nephrons. Each nephron collects a small amount of fluid and waste from a small group of capillaries. Structures of the kidney; fluid leaks from the capillaries and into the nephrons where the fluid forms urine then moves to the ureter and on to the bladder. Nitrogen-containing wastes, together with water and other wastes, form the urine as it passes through the nephrons and the kidney. The fluid within nephrons is carried out into a larger tube in the kidney called a ureter, which carries it to the bladder ( Figure 1.2). The kidneys never stop filtering waste products from the blood, so they are always producing urine. The amount of urine your kidneys produce is dependent on the amount of fluid in your body. Your body loses water through sweating, breathing, and urination. The water and other fluids you drink every day help to replace the lost water. This water ends up circulating in the blood because blood plasma is mostly water. 	each kidney has up to 1000 individual filtering units	false
The filtering action of the kidneys is controlled by the pituitary gland. The pituitary gland is about the size of a pea and is found below the brain ( Figure 1.3). The pituitary gland releases hormones that help the kidneys to filter water from the blood. The movement of water back into blood is controlled by a hormone called antidiuretic hormone (ADH). ADH is one of the hormones released from the pituitary gland in the brain. One of the most important roles of ADH is to control the bodys ability to hold onto water. If a person does not drink enough water, ADH is released. It causes the blood to reabsorb water from the kidneys. If the kidneys remove less water from the blood, what will the urine look like? It will look darker, because there is less water in it. When a person drinks a lot of water, then there will be a lot of water in the blood. The pituitary gland will then release a lower amount of ADH into the blood. This means less water will be reabsorbed by the blood. The kidneys then produce a large volume of urine. What color will this urine be? 	the kidneys only work when you are awake	false
Photosynthesis takes place in the organelle of the plant cell known as the chloroplasts. Chloroplasts are one of the main differences between plant and animal cells. Animal cells do not have chloroplasts, so they cannot photosynthesize. Photosynthesis occurs in two stages. During the first stage, the energy from sunlight is absorbed by the chloroplast. Water is used, and oxygen is produced during this part of the process. During the second stage, carbon dioxide is used, and glucose is produced. Chloroplasts contain stacks of thylakoids, which are flattened sacs of membrane. Energy from sunlight is absorbed by the pigment chlorophyll in the thylakoid membrane. There are two separate parts of a chloroplast: the space inside the chloroplast itself, and the space inside the thylakoids ( Figure 1.1). The inner compartments inside the thylakoids are called the thylakoid space (or lumen). This is the site of the first part of photosynthesis. The interior space that surrounds the thylakoids is filled with a fluid called stroma. This is where carbon dioxide is used to produce glucose, the second part of photosynthesis. The chloroplast is the photosynthesis fac- tory of the plant. 	chloroplasts are one of the main differences between plant and animal cells	true
Photosynthesis begins with the light reactions. It is during these reactions that the energy from sunlight is absorbed by the pigment chlorophyll in the thylakoid membranes of the chloroplast. The energy is then temporarily transferred to two molecules, ATP and NADPH, which are used in the second stage of photosynthesis. ATP and NADPH are generated by two electron transport chains. During the light reactions, water is used and oxygen is produced. These reactions can only occur during daylight as the process needs sunlight to begin. 	photosynthesis can only occur during daylight hours	true
For a population to be healthy, factors such as food, nutrients, water and space, must be available. What happens when there are not resources to support the population? Limiting factors are resources or other factors in the environment that can lower the population growth rate. Limiting factors include a low food supply and lack of space. Limiting factors can lower birth rates, increase death rates, or lead to emigration. When organisms face limiting factors, they show logistic growth (S-shaped curve, curve B: Figure 1.1). Compe- tition for resources like food and space cause the growth rate to stop increasing, so the population levels off. This flat upper line on a growth curve is the carrying capacity. The carrying capacity (K) is the maximum population size that can be supported in a particular area without destroying the habitat. Limiting factors determine the carrying capacity of a population. Recall that when there are no limiting factors, the population grows exponentially. In exponential growth (J-shaped curve, curve A: Figure 1.1), as the population size increases, the growth rate also increases. Exponential and Logistic Growth. Curve A shows exponential growth. shows logistic growth. Curve B Notice that the carrying capacity (K) is also shown. 	limiting factors to population growth raise death rates	true
If there are 12 hamburgers at a lunch table and 24 people sit down at a lunch table, will everyone be able to eat? At first, maybe you will split hamburgers in half, but if more and more people keep coming to sit at the lunch table, you will not be able to feed everyone. This is what happens in nature. But in nature, organisms that cannot get food will die or find a new place to live. It is possible for any resource to be a limiting factor, however, a resource such as food can have dramatic consequences on a population. In nature, when the population size is small, there is usually plenty of food and other resources for each individual. When there is plenty of food and other resources, organisms can easily reproduce, so the birth rate is high. As the population increases, the food supply, or the supply of another necessary resource, may decrease. When necessary resources, such as food, decrease, some individuals will die. Overall, the population cannot reproduce at the same rate, so the birth rates drop. This will cause the population growth rate to decrease. When the population decreases to a certain level where every individual can get enough food and other resources, and the birth and death rates become stable, the population has leveled off at its carrying capacity. 	as the population increases resource availability decreases	true
The male reproductive organs include the penis, testes, and epididymis ( Figure 1.1). The figure also shows other parts of the male reproductive system. The penis is a cylinder-shaped organ. It contains the urethra. The urethra is a tube that carries urine out of the body. The urethra also carries sperm out of the body. This drawing shows the organs of the male reproductive system. It shows the organs from the side. Find each organ in the drawing as you read about it in the text. The two testes (singular, testis) are egg-shaped organs. They produce sperm and secrete testosterone. The testes are found inside of the scrotum. The scrotum is a sac that hangs down outside the body. The scrotum also contains the epididymis. The testes, being in the scrotum outside the body, allow the temperature of the sperm to be maintained at a few degrees lower than body temperature. This is necessary for the stability of these reproductive cells. The epididymis is a tube that is about six meters (20 feet) long in adults. It is tightly coiled, so it fits inside the scrotum. It rests on top of the testes. The epididymis is where sperm grow larger and mature. The epididymis also stores sperm until they leave the body. Other parts of the male reproductive system include the vas deferens and the prostate gland. Both of these structures are pictured below ( Figure 1.1). The vas deferens is a tube that carries sperm from the epididymis to the urethra. The prostate gland secretes a fluid that mixes with sperm to help form semen. The prostate gland is located beneath the bladder. Semen is a "milky" liquid that carries sperm through the urethra and out of the body. In addition to sperm cells, semen contains sugars (fructose) which provide energy to the sperm cells, and enzymes and other substances which help the sperm survive. 	the epididymis is over 20 feet long in adult males	true
The male reproductive organs include the penis, testes, and epididymis ( Figure 1.1). The figure also shows other parts of the male reproductive system. The penis is a cylinder-shaped organ. It contains the urethra. The urethra is a tube that carries urine out of the body. The urethra also carries sperm out of the body. This drawing shows the organs of the male reproductive system. It shows the organs from the side. Find each organ in the drawing as you read about it in the text. The two testes (singular, testis) are egg-shaped organs. They produce sperm and secrete testosterone. The testes are found inside of the scrotum. The scrotum is a sac that hangs down outside the body. The scrotum also contains the epididymis. The testes, being in the scrotum outside the body, allow the temperature of the sperm to be maintained at a few degrees lower than body temperature. This is necessary for the stability of these reproductive cells. The epididymis is a tube that is about six meters (20 feet) long in adults. It is tightly coiled, so it fits inside the scrotum. It rests on top of the testes. The epididymis is where sperm grow larger and mature. The epididymis also stores sperm until they leave the body. Other parts of the male reproductive system include the vas deferens and the prostate gland. Both of these structures are pictured below ( Figure 1.1). The vas deferens is a tube that carries sperm from the epididymis to the urethra. The prostate gland secretes a fluid that mixes with sperm to help form semen. The prostate gland is located beneath the bladder. Semen is a "milky" liquid that carries sperm through the urethra and out of the body. In addition to sperm cells, semen contains sugars (fructose) which provide energy to the sperm cells, and enzymes and other substances which help the sperm survive. 	the testes store sperm until they leave the body	false
Dogs have puppies. Cats have kittens. All organisms reproduce, obviously including humans. Like other mammals, humans have a body system that controls reproduction. It is called the reproductive system. It is the only human body system that is very different in males and females. The male and female reproductive systems have different organs and different functions. The male reproductive system has two main functions: 1. Producing sperm. 2. Releasing testosterone into the body. Sperm are male gametes, or reproductive cells. When a male gamete meets a female gamete, they can form a new organism. Sperm form when certain cells in the male reproductive system divide by meiosis, resulting in cells with half the amount of DNA as a regular "body" cell. More precisely, sperm cells are haploid sex cells, having one set of chromosomes. Regular body cells are diploid, having two set of chromosomes. As there are 46 chromosomes in a diploid human cell, how many are in a human sperm cell? When males grow older, they produce millions of sperm each day. The male reproductive system also maintains and transports and delivers sperm and a protective fluid, known as semen. Testosterone is the main sex hormone in males. Hormones are chemicals that control many body processes. Testosterone has two major roles: During the teen years, testosterone causes the reproductive organs to mature. It also causes other male traits to develop. For example, it causes hair to grow on the face and allows for muscle growth. During adulthood, testosterone helps a man to produce sperm. When a hormone is released into the body, we say it is "secreted." Testosterone is secreted by males, but it is not the only sex hormone that males secrete. Males also secrete small amounts of estrogen. Even though estrogen is the main female sex hormone, scientists think that estrogen is needed for normal sperm production in males. 	of all the organ systems the reproductive system is the only one with significant differences between males and females	true
Dogs have puppies. Cats have kittens. All organisms reproduce, obviously including humans. Like other mammals, humans have a body system that controls reproduction. It is called the reproductive system. It is the only human body system that is very different in males and females. The male and female reproductive systems have different organs and different functions. The male reproductive system has two main functions: 1. Producing sperm. 2. Releasing testosterone into the body. Sperm are male gametes, or reproductive cells. When a male gamete meets a female gamete, they can form a new organism. Sperm form when certain cells in the male reproductive system divide by meiosis, resulting in cells with half the amount of DNA as a regular "body" cell. More precisely, sperm cells are haploid sex cells, having one set of chromosomes. Regular body cells are diploid, having two set of chromosomes. As there are 46 chromosomes in a diploid human cell, how many are in a human sperm cell? When males grow older, they produce millions of sperm each day. The male reproductive system also maintains and transports and delivers sperm and a protective fluid, known as semen. Testosterone is the main sex hormone in males. Hormones are chemicals that control many body processes. Testosterone has two major roles: During the teen years, testosterone causes the reproductive organs to mature. It also causes other male traits to develop. For example, it causes hair to grow on the face and allows for muscle growth. During adulthood, testosterone helps a man to produce sperm. When a hormone is released into the body, we say it is "secreted." Testosterone is secreted by males, but it is not the only sex hormone that males secrete. Males also secrete small amounts of estrogen. Even though estrogen is the main female sex hormone, scientists think that estrogen is needed for normal sperm production in males. 	males make some of the female sex hormone estrogen	true
The menstrual cycle is a series of changes in the reproductive system of mature females that repeats every month. While the egg and follicle are developing in the ovary, tissues are building up inside the uterus, the reproductive organ where the baby would develop. The uterus develops a thick lining covered in tiny blood vessels. This prepares the uterus to receive an egg that could develop into a child (a fertilized egg). The occurs during the first part of the cycle. Ovulation, the release of an egg from the ovary, occurs at about the midpoint of the cycle. This would be around day 14 of a 28 day cycle. The egg is swept into the fallopian tube. If sperm is present, fertilization may occur. As sperm can only survive in the fallopian tube for up to a few days, fertilization can only occur within those few days post-ovulation. If the egg is fertilized, the egg makes its way through the fallopian tube into the uterus, where it imbeds into the thick lining. When this occurs, the monthly cycle stops. The monthly cycle does not resume until the pregnancy is over. If a sperm does not enter an egg, the lining of the uterus breaks down. Blood and other tissues from the lining break off from the uterus. They pass through the vagina and out of the body. This is called menstruation. Menstruation is also called a menstrual period. It lasts about 4 days, on average. When the menstrual period ends, the cycle repeats. Some women feel discomfort during this process. Some people think that the average length of a menstrual period is the same as the normal length. They assume that shorter or longer menstrual periods are not normal. In fact, menstrual periods can vary from 1 to 8 days in length. This is usually normal. The average length of the cycle (time between menstrual periods) is about 28 days, but there is no normal cycle length. Some women experience cramping and pain before and during menstruation. 	an egg can be fertilized any day of the monthly cycle	false
The menstrual cycle is a series of changes in the reproductive system of mature females that repeats every month. While the egg and follicle are developing in the ovary, tissues are building up inside the uterus, the reproductive organ where the baby would develop. The uterus develops a thick lining covered in tiny blood vessels. This prepares the uterus to receive an egg that could develop into a child (a fertilized egg). The occurs during the first part of the cycle. Ovulation, the release of an egg from the ovary, occurs at about the midpoint of the cycle. This would be around day 14 of a 28 day cycle. The egg is swept into the fallopian tube. If sperm is present, fertilization may occur. As sperm can only survive in the fallopian tube for up to a few days, fertilization can only occur within those few days post-ovulation. If the egg is fertilized, the egg makes its way through the fallopian tube into the uterus, where it imbeds into the thick lining. When this occurs, the monthly cycle stops. The monthly cycle does not resume until the pregnancy is over. If a sperm does not enter an egg, the lining of the uterus breaks down. Blood and other tissues from the lining break off from the uterus. They pass through the vagina and out of the body. This is called menstruation. Menstruation is also called a menstrual period. It lasts about 4 days, on average. When the menstrual period ends, the cycle repeats. Some women feel discomfort during this process. Some people think that the average length of a menstrual period is the same as the normal length. They assume that shorter or longer menstrual periods are not normal. In fact, menstrual periods can vary from 1 to 8 days in length. This is usually normal. The average length of the cycle (time between menstrual periods) is about 28 days, but there is no normal cycle length. Some women experience cramping and pain before and during menstruation. 	during menstruation bleeding occurs as tissue breaks away from the uterus	true
Microscopes, tools that you may get to use in your class, are some of the most important tools in biology ( Figure Microscopy is the study of small objects using microscopes. Look at your fingertips. Before microscopes were invented in 1595, the smallest things you could see on yourself were the tiny lines in your skin. But what else is hidden in your skin? 	microscopes have been around for over 400 years	true
Over four hundred years ago, two Dutch spectacle makers, Zaccharias Janssen and his son Hans, were experimenting with several lenses in a tube. They discovered that nearby objects appeared greatly enlarged, or magnified. This was the forerunner of the compound microscope and of the telescope. In 1665, Robert Hooke, an English natural scientist, used a microscope to zoom in on a piece of cork - the stuff that makes up the stoppers in wine bottles, which is made from tree bark. Inside of cork, he discovered tiny structures, which he called cells. It turns out that cells are the smallest structural unit of living organisms. This finding eventually led to the development of the theory that all living things are made of cells. Without microscopes, this discovery would not have been possible, and the cell theory would not have been developed. Hookes discovery of the cell set the stage for other scientists to discover other types of organisms. After Hooke, the "father of microscopy," Dutch scientist Antoine van Leeuwenhoek ( Figure 1.2) taught himself to make one of the first microscopes. In one of his early experiments, van Leeuwenhoek took a sample of scum from his own teeth and used his microscope to discover bacteria, the smallest living organism on the planet. Using microscopes, van Leeuwenhoek also discovered one-celled protists and sperm cells. Today, microscopes are used by all types of scientists, including cell biologists, microbiologists, virologists, forensic scientists, entomologists, taxonomists, and many other types. Antoine van Leeuwenhoek, a Dutch cloth merchant with a passion for microscopy. 	antoine van leeuwenhoek discovered the cell by looking at cork through a microscope	false
When you take a walk along a beach, what do you find there? Sand, the ocean, lots of sunlight. You may also find shells. The shells you find are most likely left by organisms in the phylum Mollusca. On the beach, you can find the shells of many different mollusks ( Figure 1.1), including clams, mussels, scallops, oysters, and snails. Mollusks are invertebrates that usually have a hard shell, a mantle, and a radula. Their glossy pearls, mother of pearl, and abalone shells are like pieces of jewelry. Some mollusks, such as squid and octopus, do not have shells. 	pearls are produced by mollusks	true
When you take a walk along a beach, what do you find there? Sand, the ocean, lots of sunlight. You may also find shells. The shells you find are most likely left by organisms in the phylum Mollusca. On the beach, you can find the shells of many different mollusks ( Figure 1.1), including clams, mussels, scallops, oysters, and snails. Mollusks are invertebrates that usually have a hard shell, a mantle, and a radula. Their glossy pearls, mother of pearl, and abalone shells are like pieces of jewelry. Some mollusks, such as squid and octopus, do not have shells. 	mollusks are the only organisms to have a radula	true
Anaerobic exercises comprise brief periods of physical exertion and high-intensity, strength-training activities. Anaerobic exercises cause muscles to get bigger and stronger. Anaerobic exercises use a resistance against which the muscle has to work to lift or push away. The resistance can be a weight or a persons own body weight (Figure 	anaerobic exercises such as running increase muscle strength	false
Regular physical exercise is important in preventing lifestyle diseases such as cardiovascular disease, some types of cancer, type 2 diabetes, and obesity. Regular exercise also improves the health of the muscular system. Muscles that are exercised are bigger and stronger than muscles that are not exercised. Exercise improves both muscular strength and muscular endurance. Muscular strength is the ability of a muscle to use force during a contraction. Muscular endurance is the ability of a muscle to continue to contract over a long time without getting tired. Exercises are grouped into three types depending on the effect they have on the body: Aerobic exercises, such as cycling, walking, and running, increase muscular endurance and cardiovascular health. Anaerobic exercises, such as weight training or sprinting, increase muscle strength. Flexibility exercises, such as stretching, improve the range of motion of muscles and joints. Regular stretching helps people avoid activity-related injuries. 	regular physical exercise can prevent lifestyle diseases	true
Smooth muscles and cardiac muscles are not attached to bone. Recall that these types of muscles are under involuntary control. Smooth muscle is responsible for the contractility of hollow organs, such as blood vessels, the gastrointestinal tract, the bladder, or the uterus. Like skeletal muscles, smooth muscle fibers do contract together, causing the muscle to shorten. Smooth muscles have numerous functions, including the following. The smooth muscle in the uterus helps a woman to push out her baby. In the bladder, smooth muscle helps to push out urine. Smooth muscles move food through the digestive tract. In arteries, smooth muscle movements maintain the arteries diameter. Smooth muscle regulates air flow in lungs. Smooth muscle in the lungs helps the airways to expand and contract as necessary. Smooth muscles in arteries and veins are largely responsible for regulation of blood pressure. Cardiac muscle also contracts and gets shorter. This muscle is found only in the heart. The sudden burst of contraction forces blood throughout your body. When the cardiac muscle relaxes, the heart fills with blood. This rhythmic contraction must continue for your whole life, luckily the heart muscle never gets tired. If your heart beats 75 times a minute, how many times does it beat in an hour? A day? A year? 85 years? 	when smooth muscles contract bones move	false
When skeletal muscles contract, bones move. But how do muscles make your bones move? A voluntary muscles usually works across a joint. It is attached to both the bones on either side of the joint by strong cords called tendons. A tendon is a tough band of connective tissue that connects a muscle to a bone. Tendons are similar to ligaments, except that ligaments join bones to each other. Muscles move the body by contracting against the skeleton. When muscles contract, they get shorter. By contracting, muscles pull on bones and allow the body to move. Muscles can only contract. They cannot actively extend, though they can move or relax back into the non-contracted neutral position. Therefore, to move bones in opposite directions, pairs of muscles must work in opposition. Each muscle in the pair works against the other to move bones at the joints of the body. The muscle that contracts to cause a joint to bend is called the flexor. The muscle that contracts to cause the joint to straighten is called the extensor. When one muscle is contracted, the other muscle from the pair is always elongated. For example, the biceps and triceps muscles work together to allow you to bend and straighten your elbow. When you want to bend your elbow, your biceps muscle contracts (Figure 1.1), and, at the same time, the triceps muscle relaxes. The biceps is the flexor, and the triceps is the extensor of your elbow joint. Other muscles that work together are the quadriceps and hamstrings used to bend and straighten the knee, and the pectorals and trapezius used to move the arms and shoulders forward and backward. During daily routines we do not use muscles equally. For example, we use our biceps more than our triceps due to lifting against gravity. 	tendons join two bones to each other	false
The process of DNA replication is not always 100% accurate. Sometimes the wrong base is inserted in the new strand of DNA. This wrong base could become permanent. A permanent change in the sequence of DNA is known as a mutation. Small changes in the DNA sequence are usually point mutations, which is a change in a single nucleotide. Once DNA has a mutation, that mutation will be copied each time the DNA replicates. After cell division, each resulting cell will carry the mutation. A mutation may have no effect. However, sometimes a mutation can cause a protein to be made incorrectly. A defect in the protein can affect how well the protein works, or whether it works at all. Usually the loss of a protein function is detrimental to the organism. In rare circumstances, though, the mutation can be beneficial. Mutations are a mechanism for how species evolve. For example, suppose a mutation in an animals DNA causes the loss of an enzyme that makes a dark pigment in the animals skin. If the population of animals has moved to a light colored environment, the animals with the mutant gene would have a lighter skin color and be better camouflaged. So in this case, the mutation is beneficial. 	a mutation is a change in the dna sequence the change is always harmful	false
Mutations may also occur in chromosomes ( Figure 1.1). These mutations are going to be fairly large mutations, possible affecting many genes. Possible types of mutations in chromosomes include: 1. Deletion: When a segment of DNA is lost, so there is a missing segment in the chromosome. These usually result in many genes missing from the chromosome. 2. Duplication: When a segment of DNA is repeated, creating a longer chromosome. These usually result in multiple copies of genes in the chromosome. 3. Inversion: When a segment of DNA is flipped and then reattached to the same chromosome. 4. Insertion: When a segment of DNA from one chromosome is added to another, unrelated chromosome. 5. Translocation: When two segments from different chromosomes change positions. 	deletions occur when a segment of dna is repeated	false
Along with the skin, the integumentary system includes the nails and hair. Both the nails and hair contain the tough protein, keratin. The keratin forms fibers, which makes your nails and hair tough and strong. Keratin is similar in toughness to chitin, the carbohydrate found in the exoskeleton of arthropods. 	hair and nails are the two main components of the integumentary system	false
Along with the skin, the integumentary system includes the nails and hair. Both the nails and hair contain the tough protein, keratin. The keratin forms fibers, which makes your nails and hair tough and strong. Keratin is similar in toughness to chitin, the carbohydrate found in the exoskeleton of arthropods. 	nails are like the claws of animals	true
Michelle was riding her scooter when she hit a hole in the street and started to lose control. She thought she would fall, but, in the blink of an eye, she shifted her weight and kept her balance. Her heart was pounding, but at least she didnt get hurt. How was she able to react so quickly? Michelle can thank her nervous system for that ( Figure 1.1). The nervous system, together with the endocrine system, controls all the other organ systems. The nervous system sends one type of signal around the body, and the endocrine system sends another type of signal around the body. The endocrine system makes and releases chemical messenger molecules, or hormones, which tell other body parts that a change or a reaction is necessary. So what type of signal does the nervous system send? Controlling muscles and maintaining balance are just two of the roles of the nervous system. The nervous system also lets you: Sense your surroundings with your eyes and other sense organs. Sense the environment inside of your body, including temperature. Control your internal body systems and keep them in balance. Staying balanced when riding a scooter requires control over the bodys muscles. The nervous system controls the muscles and maintains balance. Prepare your body to fight or flee in an emergency. Use language, think, learn, and remember. The nervous system works by sending and receiving electrical signals. The main organs of the nervous system are the brain and the spinal cord. The signals are carried by nerves in the body, similar to the wires that carry electricity all over a house. The signals travel from all over the body to the spinal cord and up to the brain, as well as moving in the other direction. For example, when Michelle started to fall off her scooter, her nervous system sensed that she was losing her balance. It responded by sending messages from her brain to muscles in her body. Some muscles tightened while others relaxed. Maybe these actions moved her hips or her arms. The nervous system, working together with the muscular and skeletal systems, allowed Michelle to react to the situation. As a result, Michelles body became balanced again. The messages released by the nervous system traveled through nerves. Just like the electricity that travels through wires, nerve quickly carry the electrical messages around the body. Think about how quickly all this happens. It has to be really fast, otherwise Michelle would not have been able to react. What would happen if a car pulled out unexpectedly in front of Michelle? A signal would have to go from her eyes to her brain and then to her muscles. What allows the nervous system to react so fast. It starts with the special cell of the nervous system, the neuron. 	the brain is part of the nervous system	true
Michelle was riding her scooter when she hit a hole in the street and started to lose control. She thought she would fall, but, in the blink of an eye, she shifted her weight and kept her balance. Her heart was pounding, but at least she didnt get hurt. How was she able to react so quickly? Michelle can thank her nervous system for that ( Figure 1.1). The nervous system, together with the endocrine system, controls all the other organ systems. The nervous system sends one type of signal around the body, and the endocrine system sends another type of signal around the body. The endocrine system makes and releases chemical messenger molecules, or hormones, which tell other body parts that a change or a reaction is necessary. So what type of signal does the nervous system send? Controlling muscles and maintaining balance are just two of the roles of the nervous system. The nervous system also lets you: Sense your surroundings with your eyes and other sense organs. Sense the environment inside of your body, including temperature. Control your internal body systems and keep them in balance. Staying balanced when riding a scooter requires control over the bodys muscles. The nervous system controls the muscles and maintains balance. Prepare your body to fight or flee in an emergency. Use language, think, learn, and remember. The nervous system works by sending and receiving electrical signals. The main organs of the nervous system are the brain and the spinal cord. The signals are carried by nerves in the body, similar to the wires that carry electricity all over a house. The signals travel from all over the body to the spinal cord and up to the brain, as well as moving in the other direction. For example, when Michelle started to fall off her scooter, her nervous system sensed that she was losing her balance. It responded by sending messages from her brain to muscles in her body. Some muscles tightened while others relaxed. Maybe these actions moved her hips or her arms. The nervous system, working together with the muscular and skeletal systems, allowed Michelle to react to the situation. As a result, Michelles body became balanced again. The messages released by the nervous system traveled through nerves. Just like the electricity that travels through wires, nerve quickly carry the electrical messages around the body. Think about how quickly all this happens. It has to be really fast, otherwise Michelle would not have been able to react. What would happen if a car pulled out unexpectedly in front of Michelle? A signal would have to go from her eyes to her brain and then to her muscles. What allows the nervous system to react so fast. It starts with the special cell of the nervous system, the neuron. 	hormones are made by the nervous system	false
Many disorders of the reproductive system are not sexually transmitted infections. They are not caused by pathogens, so they dont spread from person to person. They develop for other reasons. The disorders are different between males and females. In both genders, the disorders could cause a little discomfort, or they could cause death. 	all reproductive system disorders are caused by pathogens	false
Most common disorders of the male reproductive system involve the testes. For example, injuries to the testes are very common. In teenagers, injuries to the testes most often occur while playing sports. An injury such as a strike or kick to the testes can be very painful. It may also cause bruising and swelling. Such injuries do not usually last very long. Another disorder of the testes is cancer. Cancer of the testes is most common in males aged 15 to 35. It occurs when cells in the testes grow out of control. The cells form a lump called a tumor. If found early, cancer of the testes usually can be easily cured with surgery. 	injuries to the testes most often occur while playing sports	true
A nonrenewable resource is a natural resource that is consumed or used up faster than it can be made by nature. Two main types of nonrenewable resources are fossil fuels and nuclear power. Fossil fuels, such as petroleum, coal, and natural gas, formed from plant and animal remains over periods from 50 to 350 million years ago. They took millions of years to form. Humans have been consuming fossil fuels for less than 200 years, yet remaining reserves of oil can supply our needs only until around the year 2055. Natural gas can only supply us until around 2085. Coal will last longer, until around the year 2250. That is why it is so important to develop alternate forms of energy, especially for our cars. Today, electric cars are becoming more and more common. Considering the year 2055 is not that far away, what would happen if we ran out of gasoline? Alternative use of energy, especially in transportation, must become a standard feature of all cars and trucks and planes by the middle of the century. Nuclear power is the use of nuclear energy ( nuclear fission) to create energy inside of a nuclear reactor ( Figure uranium fuel supplies, which will last to about the year 2100 (or longer) at current rates of use. However, new technologies could make some uranium fuel reserves more useful. Population growth, especially in developing countries, should make people think about how fast they are consuming resources. Governments around the world should seriously consider these issues. Developing nations will also increase demands on natural resources as they build more factories ( Figure 1.2). Improvements in technology, conservation of resources, and controls in population growth could all help to decrease the demand on natural resources. Aerial photo of the Bruce Nuclear Gener- ating Station near Kincardine, Ontario. Per capita energy consumption (2003) shows the unequal distribution of wealth, technology, and energy use. 	two main types of nonrenewable resources are fossil fuels and nuclear power	true
A nonrenewable resource is a natural resource that is consumed or used up faster than it can be made by nature. Two main types of nonrenewable resources are fossil fuels and nuclear power. Fossil fuels, such as petroleum, coal, and natural gas, formed from plant and animal remains over periods from 50 to 350 million years ago. They took millions of years to form. Humans have been consuming fossil fuels for less than 200 years, yet remaining reserves of oil can supply our needs only until around the year 2055. Natural gas can only supply us until around 2085. Coal will last longer, until around the year 2250. That is why it is so important to develop alternate forms of energy, especially for our cars. Today, electric cars are becoming more and more common. Considering the year 2055 is not that far away, what would happen if we ran out of gasoline? Alternative use of energy, especially in transportation, must become a standard feature of all cars and trucks and planes by the middle of the century. Nuclear power is the use of nuclear energy ( nuclear fission) to create energy inside of a nuclear reactor ( Figure uranium fuel supplies, which will last to about the year 2100 (or longer) at current rates of use. However, new technologies could make some uranium fuel reserves more useful. Population growth, especially in developing countries, should make people think about how fast they are consuming resources. Governments around the world should seriously consider these issues. Developing nations will also increase demands on natural resources as they build more factories ( Figure 1.2). Improvements in technology, conservation of resources, and controls in population growth could all help to decrease the demand on natural resources. Aerial photo of the Bruce Nuclear Gener- ating Station near Kincardine, Ontario. Per capita energy consumption (2003) shows the unequal distribution of wealth, technology, and energy use. 	it is possible that by the year 2055 the worlds oil reserves will be gone	true
The main chemical components of living organisms are known as organic compounds. Organic compounds are molecules built around the element carbon (C). Living things are made up of very large molecules. These large molecules are called macromolecules because macro means large; they are made by smaller molecules bonding together. Our body gets these smaller molecules, the "building blocks" or monomers, of organic molecules from the food we eat. Which organic molecules do you recognize from the list below? The four main types of macromolecules found in living organisms, shown in Table 1.1, are: 1. 2. 3. 4. Proteins. Carbohydrates. Lipids. Nucleic Acids. Proteins C, H, O, N, S Enzymes, muscle fibers, antibodies Elements Examples Monomer building molecule) (small block Amino acids Carbohydrates C, H, O Sugar, glucose, starch, glycogen, cellulose Monosaccharides (simple sugars) Lipids C, H, O, P Fats, oils, waxes, steroids, phospho- lipids in membranes Often include fatty acids Nucleic Acids C, H, O, P, N DNA, RNA, ATP Nucleotides 	organic compounds are built around the element oxygen	false
Have you ever tried to put oil in water? They dont mix. Oil is a type of lipid. Lipids are molecules such as fats, oils, and waxes. The most common lipids in your diet are probably fats and oils. Fats are solid at room temperature, whereas oils are fluid. Animals use fats for long-term energy storage and to keep warm. Plants use oils for long- term energy storage. When preparing food, we often use animal fats, such as butter, or plant oils, such as olive oil or canola oil. There are many more type of lipids that are important to life. One of the most important are the phospholipids that make up the protective outer membrane of all cells ( Figure 1.5). These lipid membranes are impermeable to most water soluble compounds. 	fats and oils are lipids at room temperature oils are solid and fats are liquid	false
A single tissue alone cannot do all the jobs that are needed to keep you alive and healthy. Two or more tissues working together can do a lot more. An organ is a structure made of two or more tissues that work together. The heart ( Figure 1.2) is made up of the four types of tissues. The four different tissue types work to- gether in the heart as they do in the other organs. 	there are only four types of tissue in the human body	true
Your heart pumps blood around your body. But how does your heart get blood to and from every cell in your body? Your heart is connected to blood vessels such as veins and arteries. Organs that work together form an organ system. Together, your heart, blood, and blood vessels form your cardiovascular system. What other organ systems can you think of? 	a group of similar cells that work together is known as a organ	false
There is good evidence that life has probably existed on Earth for most of Earths history. Fossils of blue-green algae found in Australia are the oldest fossils of life forms on Earth. They are at least 3.5 billion years old ( Figure 1.1). 	early earth was full of gas like oxygen and carbon dioxide	false
How did life begin? In order to answer this question, scientists need to know what kinds of materials were available at that time. We know that the ingredients for life were present at the beginning of Earths history. Scientists believe early Earth did not contain oxygen gas (photosynthesis had yet to evolve), but did contain other gases, including: nitrogen gas, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, water vapor, hydrogen sulfide. Some of the oldest fossils on Earth were found along the coast of Australia, similar to the area shown here. Where did these ingredients come from? Some chemicals were in water and volcanic gases ( Figure 1.2). Other chemicals would have come from meteorites in space. Energy to drive chemical reactions was provided by volcanic eruptions and lightning. Today, we have evidence that life on Earth came from random reactions between chem- ical compounds, which formed molecules, or groups of atoms bonded together. Small molecules, such as those present in the early atmosphere, can provide the components (including the elements C, H, N, O and S) to make larger molecules. These early molecules further reacted and eventually formed even larger molecules and organic compounds, such as amino acids (which combine to form proteins), and nucleotides (which form nucleic acids - RNA or DNA). These organic molecules eventually came together in the right combinations to form basic cells. The components that were necessary for the formation of the first cells are still being studied. How long did it take to develop the first life forms? As much as 1 billion years. Many scientists still study the origin of the first life forms because there are many questions left unanswered, such as, "Did proteins or nucleic acids develop first?" or "What exactly were early Earths atmospheric conditions like?" There is a lot of work still left to answer these and similar questions. Some clues to the origins of life on Earth come from studying the early life forms that developed in hot springs, such as the Grand Prismatic Spring at Yellowstone National Park. This spring is approxi- mately 250 feet deep and 300 feet wide. 	organic compounds are needed to build cells	true
Most air pollutants can be traced to the burning of fossil fuels. Fossil fuels are burned during many processes, including in power plants to create electricity, in factories to make machinery run, in power stoves and furnaces for heating, and in waste facilities. Perhaps one of the biggest uses of fossil fuels is in transportation. Fossil fuels are used in cars, trains, and planes. Air pollution can also be caused by agriculture, such as cattle ranching and the use of fertilizers and pesticides. Other sources of air pollution include the production of plastics, refrigerants, and aerosols, in nuclear power and defense, from landfills and mining, and from biological warfare. 	the burning of fossil fuels causes most air pollution	true
Air is all around us. Air is essential for life. Sometimes, humans can pollute the air. For example, releasing smoke and dust from factories and cars can cause air pollution. Air pollution is due to chemical substances and particles released into the air mainly by human actions. This pollution affects entire ecosystems around the world. Pollution can also cause many human health problems, and it can also cause death. Air pollution can be found both outdoors and indoors. Outdoor air pollution is made of chemical particles. When smoke or other pollutants enter the air, the particles found in the pollution mix with the air. Air is polluted when it contains many large toxic particles. Outdoor air pollution changes the natural characteristics of the atmosphere. Primary pollutants are added directly to the atmosphere. Fires add primary pollutants to the air. Particles released from the fire directly enter the air and cause pollution ( Figure 1.1). Burning of fossil fuels such as oil and coal is a major source of primary pollutants ( Figure Secondary pollutants are formed when primary pollutants interact with sunlight, air, or each other. They do not directly cause pollution. However, when they interact with other parts of the air, they do cause pollution. For example, ozone is created when some pollutants interact with sunlight. High levels of ozone in the atmosphere can cause problems for humans. Wildfires, either natural or human-caused, release particles into the air, one of the many causes of air pollution. A major source of air pollution is the burn- ing of fossil fuels from factories, power plants, and motor vehicles. 	outdoor air pollution changes the natural characteristics of the atmosphere	true
Has this ever happened to you? A student sitting next to you in class has a cold. The other student is coughing and sneezing, but you feel fine. Two days later, you come down with a cold, too. Diseases like colds are contagious. Contagious diseases are also called infectious diseases. An infectious disease is a disease that spreads from person to person. Infectious diseases are caused by pathogens. A pathogen is a living thing or virus that causes disease. Pathogens are commonly called germs. They can travel from one person to another. 	an infectious disease is contagious	true
Has this ever happened to you? A student sitting next to you in class has a cold. The other student is coughing and sneezing, but you feel fine. Two days later, you come down with a cold, too. Diseases like colds are contagious. Contagious diseases are also called infectious diseases. An infectious disease is a disease that spreads from person to person. Infectious diseases are caused by pathogens. A pathogen is a living thing or virus that causes disease. Pathogens are commonly called germs. They can travel from one person to another. 	medicines called antibiotics can cure most diseases caused by viruses	false
A pedigree is a chart that shows the inheritance of a trait over several generations. A pedigree is commonly created for families, and it outlines the inheritance patterns of genetic disorders and traits. A pedigree can help predict the probability that offspring will inherit a genetic disorder. Pictured below is a pedigree displaying recessive inheritance of a disorder through three generations ( Figure 1.1). From studying a pedigree, scientists can determine the following: If the trait is sex-linked (on the X or Y chromosome) or autosomal (on a chromosome that does not determine sex). If the trait is inherited in a dominant or recessive fashion. Sometimes pedigrees can also help determine whether individuals with the trait are heterozygous (two different alleles) or homozygous (two of the same allele). Some points to keep in mind when analyzing a pedigree are: 1. With autosomal recessive inheritance, all affected individuals will be homozygous recessive. 2. With dominant inheritance, all affected individuals will have at least one dominant allele. They will be either homozygous dominant or heterozygous. 3. With sex-linked inheritance, more males (XY) than females (XX) usually have the trait. Sex-linked inheritance is usually recessive. 	a pedigree shows family relationships	true
A pedigree is a chart that shows the inheritance of a trait over several generations. A pedigree is commonly created for families, and it outlines the inheritance patterns of genetic disorders and traits. A pedigree can help predict the probability that offspring will inherit a genetic disorder. Pictured below is a pedigree displaying recessive inheritance of a disorder through three generations ( Figure 1.1). From studying a pedigree, scientists can determine the following: If the trait is sex-linked (on the X or Y chromosome) or autosomal (on a chromosome that does not determine sex). If the trait is inherited in a dominant or recessive fashion. Sometimes pedigrees can also help determine whether individuals with the trait are heterozygous (two different alleles) or homozygous (two of the same allele). Some points to keep in mind when analyzing a pedigree are: 1. With autosomal recessive inheritance, all affected individuals will be homozygous recessive. 2. With dominant inheritance, all affected individuals will have at least one dominant allele. They will be either homozygous dominant or heterozygous. 3. With sex-linked inheritance, more males (XY) than females (XX) usually have the trait. Sex-linked inheritance is usually recessive. 	a pedigree can be useful in understanding inheritance	true
There are other nerves in your body that are not found in the brain or spinal cord. The peripheral nervous system (PNS) ( Figure 1.1) contains all the nerves in the body that are found outside of the central nervous system. They include nerves of the hands, arms, feet, legs, and trunk. They also include nerves of the scalp, neck, and face. Nerves that send and receive messages to the internal organs are also part of the peripheral nervous system. The peripheral nervous system is divided into two parts, the sensory division and the motor division. How these divisions of the peripheral nervous system are related to the rest of the nervous system is shown below ( Figure 1.2). Refer to the figure as you read more about the peripheral nervous system in the text that follows. 	there are nerves that send and receive messages to the internal organs	true
There are other nerves in your body that are not found in the brain or spinal cord. The peripheral nervous system (PNS) ( Figure 1.1) contains all the nerves in the body that are found outside of the central nervous system. They include nerves of the hands, arms, feet, legs, and trunk. They also include nerves of the scalp, neck, and face. Nerves that send and receive messages to the internal organs are also part of the peripheral nervous system. The peripheral nervous system is divided into two parts, the sensory division and the motor division. How these divisions of the peripheral nervous system are related to the rest of the nervous system is shown below ( Figure 1.2). Refer to the figure as you read more about the peripheral nervous system in the text that follows. 	the peripheral nervous system sends messages along nerves from the brain to the spinal cord	false
If a plant gets hungry, it cannot walk to a local restaurant and buy a slice of pizza. So, how does a plant get the food it needs to survive? Plants are producers, which means they are able to make, or produce, their own food. They also produce the "food" for other organisms. Plants are also autotrophs. Autotrophs are the organisms that collect the energy from the sun and turn it into organic compounds. Using the energy from the sun, they produce complex organic compounds from simple inorganic molecules. So once again, how does a plant get the food it needs to survive? Through photosynthesis. Photosynthesis is the process plants use to make their own food from the suns energy, carbon dioxide, and water. During photosynthesis, carbon dioxide and water combine with solar energy to create glucose, a carbohydrate (C6 H12 O6 ), and oxygen. The process can be summarized as: in the presence of sunlight, carbon dioxide + water  glucose + oxygen. Glucose, the main product of photosynthesis, is a sugar that acts as the "food" source for plants. The glucose is then converted into usable chemical energy, ATP, during cellular respiration. The oxygen formed during photosynthesis, which is necessary for animal life, is essentially a waste product of the photosynthesis process. Actually, almost all organisms obtain their energy from photosynthetic organisms. For example, if a bird eats a caterpillar, then the bird gets the energy that the caterpillar gets from the plants it eats. So the bird indirectly gets energy that began with the glucose formed through photosynthesis. Therefore, the process of photosynthesis is central to sustaining life on Earth. In eukaryotic organisms, photosynthesis occurs in chloroplasts. Only cells with chloroplastsplant cells and algal (protist) cellscan perform photosynthesis. Animal cells and fungal cells do not have chloroplasts and, therefore, cannot photosynthesize. That is why these organisms, as well as the non- photosynthetic protists, rely on other organisms to obtain their energy. These organisms are heterotrophs. The Photosynthesis Song explaining photosynthesis, can be heard at  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	glucose is the food of plants	true
If a plant gets hungry, it cannot walk to a local restaurant and buy a slice of pizza. So, how does a plant get the food it needs to survive? Plants are producers, which means they are able to make, or produce, their own food. They also produce the "food" for other organisms. Plants are also autotrophs. Autotrophs are the organisms that collect the energy from the sun and turn it into organic compounds. Using the energy from the sun, they produce complex organic compounds from simple inorganic molecules. So once again, how does a plant get the food it needs to survive? Through photosynthesis. Photosynthesis is the process plants use to make their own food from the suns energy, carbon dioxide, and water. During photosynthesis, carbon dioxide and water combine with solar energy to create glucose, a carbohydrate (C6 H12 O6 ), and oxygen. The process can be summarized as: in the presence of sunlight, carbon dioxide + water  glucose + oxygen. Glucose, the main product of photosynthesis, is a sugar that acts as the "food" source for plants. The glucose is then converted into usable chemical energy, ATP, during cellular respiration. The oxygen formed during photosynthesis, which is necessary for animal life, is essentially a waste product of the photosynthesis process. Actually, almost all organisms obtain their energy from photosynthetic organisms. For example, if a bird eats a caterpillar, then the bird gets the energy that the caterpillar gets from the plants it eats. So the bird indirectly gets energy that began with the glucose formed through photosynthesis. Therefore, the process of photosynthesis is central to sustaining life on Earth. In eukaryotic organisms, photosynthesis occurs in chloroplasts. Only cells with chloroplastsplant cells and algal (protist) cellscan perform photosynthesis. Animal cells and fungal cells do not have chloroplasts and, therefore, cannot photosynthesize. That is why these organisms, as well as the non- photosynthetic protists, rely on other organisms to obtain their energy. These organisms are heterotrophs. The Photosynthesis Song explaining photosynthesis, can be heard at  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	glucose is the main product of photosynthesis	true
Another exception to Mendels rules is polygenic inheritance, which occurs when a trait is controlled by more than one gene. This means that each dominant allele "adds" to the expression of the next dominant allele. Usually, traits are polygenic when there is wide variation in the trait. For example, humans can be many different sizes. Height is a polygenic trait, controlled by at least three genes with six alleles. If you are dominant for all of the alleles for height, then you will be very tall. There is also a wide range of skin color across people. Skin color is also a polygenic trait, as are hair and eye color. Polygenic inheritance often results in a bell shaped curve when you analyze the population ( Figure 1.1). That means that most people fall in the middle of the phenotypic range, such as average height, while very few people are at the extremes, such as very tall or very short. At one end of the curve will be individuals who are recessive for all the alleles (for example, aabbcc); at the other end will be individuals who are dominant for all the alleles (for example, AABBCC). Through the middle of the curve will be individuals who have a combination of dominant and recessive alleles (for example, AaBbCc or AaBBcc). 	phenotypes associated with polygenic traits can be represented by a bellshaped curve	true
Another exception to Mendels rules is polygenic inheritance, which occurs when a trait is controlled by more than one gene. This means that each dominant allele "adds" to the expression of the next dominant allele. Usually, traits are polygenic when there is wide variation in the trait. For example, humans can be many different sizes. Height is a polygenic trait, controlled by at least three genes with six alleles. If you are dominant for all of the alleles for height, then you will be very tall. There is also a wide range of skin color across people. Skin color is also a polygenic trait, as are hair and eye color. Polygenic inheritance often results in a bell shaped curve when you analyze the population ( Figure 1.1). That means that most people fall in the middle of the phenotypic range, such as average height, while very few people are at the extremes, such as very tall or very short. At one end of the curve will be individuals who are recessive for all the alleles (for example, aabbcc); at the other end will be individuals who are dominant for all the alleles (for example, AABBCC). Through the middle of the curve will be individuals who have a combination of dominant and recessive alleles (for example, AaBbCc or AaBBcc). 	polygenic traits demonstrate a wide variation in the phenotype	true
Population growth rate depends on birth rates and death rates, as well as migration. First, we will consider the effects of birth and death rates. You can predict the growth rate by using this simple equation: growth rate = birth rate death rate. If the birth rate is larger than the death rate, then the population grows. If the death rate is larger than the birth rate, what will happen to the population? The population size will decrease. If the birth and death rates are equal, then the population size will not change. Factors that affect population growth are: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. Age of organisms at first reproduction. How often an organism reproduces. The number of offspring of an organism. The presence or absence of parental care. How long an organism is able to reproduce. The death rate of offspring. For an ecosystem to be stable, populations in that system must be healthy, and that usually means reproducing as much as their environment allows. Do organisms reproduce yearly or every few years? Do organisms reproduce for much of their life, or just part of their life? Do organisms produce many offspring at once, or just a few, or even just one? Do many newborn organisms die, or do the majority survive? All these factors play a role in the growth of a population. Organisms can use different strategies to increase their reproduction rate. Altricial organisms are helpless at birth, and their parents give them a lot of care. This care is often seen in bird species. ( Figure 1.1). Altricial birds are usually born blind and without feathers. Compared to precocial organisms, altricial organisms have a longer period of development before they reach maturity. Precocial organisms, such as the geese shown below, can take care of themselves at birth and do not require help from their parents ( Figure 1.1). In order to reproduce as much as possible, altricial and precocial organisms must use very different strategies. (left) A hummingbird nest with young il- lustrates an altricial reproductive strategy, with a few small eggs, helpless young, and intensive parental care. (right) The Canada goose shows a precocial repro- ductive strategy. It lays a large number of large eggs, producing well-developed young. 	many birds are altricial organisms needing a lot of parental care	true
What does population growth mean? You can probably guess that it means the number of individuals in a population is increasing. The population growth rate tells you how quickly a population is increasing or decreasing. What determines the population growth rate for a particular population? 	exponential growth requires an unlimited food supply	true
While a woman is pregnant, the developing baby may be called an embryo or a fetus. Do these mean the same thing? No, in the very early stages the developing baby is called an embryo, while in the later stages it is called a fetus. When the ball of cells first implants into the uterus, it is called an embryo. The embryo stage lasts until the end of the 8th week after fertilization. After that point until birth, the developing baby is called a fetus. 	the placenta supplies the developing baby with oxygen	true
While a woman is pregnant, the developing baby may be called an embryo or a fetus. Do these mean the same thing? No, in the very early stages the developing baby is called an embryo, while in the later stages it is called a fetus. When the ball of cells first implants into the uterus, it is called an embryo. The embryo stage lasts until the end of the 8th week after fertilization. After that point until birth, the developing baby is called a fetus. 	a typical pregnancy lasts 38 weeks	true
It might seem like there is plenty of water on Earth, but thats not really the case. Water is a limited resource. That means that it is used faster than it is replaced. Theoretically, at some point in time, the supply of fresh water could run out. Though this is unlikely, it is possible. But it is a significant issue in parts of the world with large populations. As these populations continue to grow, the supply of water becomes an increasingly important issue. Even though we have lots of water in our oceans, we cannot use that water whenever we want. It takes special equipment, such as a desalination plant, and a lot of energy (and money) to convert salt water into fresh water. Of all the water on Earth, only about 1% can be used for drinking water. Almost all of the rest of the water is either salt water in the ocean or ice in glaciers and ice caps. As a result, there are water shortages many places in the world. Since we have such a limited supply of water, it is important to preserve our water supplies. Therefore, steps have been taken to prevent water pollution. Technologies have also been developed to conserve water and prevent water pollution. Sub-Saharan African countries have the most vulnerable water supplies. Some scientists believe of a potential future crisis in both Asia and Africa from pollution and depletion of natural water resources. Many countries in the Middle East are at an extreme risk of water shortages. Diminished water supplies could increase the risk of both internal conflicts or wars between countries. 	theoretically the supply of fresh water could run out	true
It might seem like there is plenty of water on Earth, but thats not really the case. Water is a limited resource. That means that it is used faster than it is replaced. Theoretically, at some point in time, the supply of fresh water could run out. Though this is unlikely, it is possible. But it is a significant issue in parts of the world with large populations. As these populations continue to grow, the supply of water becomes an increasingly important issue. Even though we have lots of water in our oceans, we cannot use that water whenever we want. It takes special equipment, such as a desalination plant, and a lot of energy (and money) to convert salt water into fresh water. Of all the water on Earth, only about 1% can be used for drinking water. Almost all of the rest of the water is either salt water in the ocean or ice in glaciers and ice caps. As a result, there are water shortages many places in the world. Since we have such a limited supply of water, it is important to preserve our water supplies. Therefore, steps have been taken to prevent water pollution. Technologies have also been developed to conserve water and prevent water pollution. Sub-Saharan African countries have the most vulnerable water supplies. Some scientists believe of a potential future crisis in both Asia and Africa from pollution and depletion of natural water resources. Many countries in the Middle East are at an extreme risk of water shortages. Diminished water supplies could increase the risk of both internal conflicts or wars between countries. 	there are drinkable water shortages in many places of the planet	true
Infectious diseases are diseases that spread from person to person. They are caused by pathogens such as bacteria, viruses or fungi. What can you do to avoid infectious diseases? Eating right and getting plenty of sleep are a good start. These habits will help keep your immune system healthy. With a healthy immune system, you will be able to fight off many pathogens. The next best way is to avoid pathogens. Though this is difficult, there are steps you can take to limit your exposure to pathogens. Here are the ten best ways to prevent the spread of infectious diseases. 1. Wash your hands frequently. 2. Dont share personal items. 3. Cover your mouth when you cough or sneeze. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. Get vaccinated. Use safe cooking practices. Be a smart traveler. Practice safe sex. Dont pick your nose (or your mouth or eyes either). Exercise caution with animals. Watch the news, and be aware of disease outbreaks. 	the best way to avoid pathogens is to wash your hands often	true
Infectious diseases are diseases that spread from person to person. They are caused by pathogens such as bacteria, viruses or fungi. What can you do to avoid infectious diseases? Eating right and getting plenty of sleep are a good start. These habits will help keep your immune system healthy. With a healthy immune system, you will be able to fight off many pathogens. The next best way is to avoid pathogens. Though this is difficult, there are steps you can take to limit your exposure to pathogens. Here are the ten best ways to prevent the spread of infectious diseases. 1. Wash your hands frequently. 2. Dont share personal items. 3. Cover your mouth when you cough or sneeze. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. Get vaccinated. Use safe cooking practices. Be a smart traveler. Practice safe sex. Dont pick your nose (or your mouth or eyes either). Exercise caution with animals. Watch the news, and be aware of disease outbreaks. 	keeping your immune system healthy helps to fight pathogens	true
Noninfectious diseases cant be passed from one person to another. Instead, these types of diseases are caused by factors such as the environment, genetics, and lifestyle. Examples of inherited noninfectious conditions include cystic fibrosis and Down syndrome. If youre born with these conditions, you must learn how to manage the symptoms. Examples of conditions caused by environmental or lifestyle factors include heart disease and skin cancer. We cant change our genetic codes, but there are plenty of ways to prevent other noninfectious diseases. For example, cutting down on exposure to cigarette smoke and the suns rays will prevent certain types of cancer. It is a fact that most chronic noninfectious diseases can be prevented. The chronic noninfectious diseases that cause the most deaths in many developed countries are largely preventable. These diseases are heart disease, stroke, diabetes and cancer, and though they do have some genetic components, they also have many lifestyle components. For example, some cancers have genetic risks, but people at high risk for cancers can have screening examinations to catch them early or sometimes can take other steps to prevent the cancers. Heart disease, stroke and diabetes are mostly linked to lifestyle choices, even when family history puts a person at higher risk for the diseases. Most allergies can be prevented by avoiding the substances that cause them. For example, you can avoid pollens by staying indoors as much as possible. You can learn to recognize plants like poison ivy and not touch them. A good way to remember how to avoid poison ivy is "leaves of three, let it be." Some people receive allergy shots to help prevent allergic reactions. The shots contain tiny amounts of allergens, which are the substances that cause an allergic reaction. After many months or years of shots, the immune system gets used to the allergens and no longer responds to them. Type 1 diabetes and other autoimmune diseases cannot be prevented. But choosing a healthy lifestyle can help prevent type 2 diabetes. Getting plenty of exercise, avoiding high-fat foods, and staying at a healthy weight can reduce the risk of developing this type of diabetes. This is especially important for people who have family members with the disease. Making these healthy lifestyle choices can also help prevent some types of cancer. In addition, you can lower the risk of cancer by avoiding carcinogens, which are substances that cause cancer. For example, you can reduce your risk of lung cancer by not smoking. You can reduce your risk of skin cancer by using sunscreen. How to choose a sunscreen that offers the most protection is explained below ( Figure 1.1). Some people think that tanning beds are a safe way to get a tan. This is a myth. Tanning beds expose the skin to UV radiation. Any exposure to UV radiation increases the risk of skin cancer. It doesnt matter whether the radiation comes from tanning lamps or the sun. Overall, people in many developed countries are contributing to higher rates of noninfectious diseases (heart disease, stroke, diabetes and cancer) by taking advantage of technology and social environments that encourage a less active lifestyle, and also encourages faster and cheaper meals. For example, many children now spend more time on their computer or watching TV then playing outdoors. The "faster and cheaper" meals are usually less healthy than other meals. Even though many people are living longer, they can choose to live more healthily by adopting regular exercise routines and healthy eating habits. When you choose a sunscreen, select one with an SPF (sun protection factor) of 30 or higher. Also, choose a sunscreen that protects against both UVB and UVA radiation. 	infectious diseases cant be passed from one person to another	false
Noninfectious diseases cant be passed from one person to another. Instead, these types of diseases are caused by factors such as the environment, genetics, and lifestyle. Examples of inherited noninfectious conditions include cystic fibrosis and Down syndrome. If youre born with these conditions, you must learn how to manage the symptoms. Examples of conditions caused by environmental or lifestyle factors include heart disease and skin cancer. We cant change our genetic codes, but there are plenty of ways to prevent other noninfectious diseases. For example, cutting down on exposure to cigarette smoke and the suns rays will prevent certain types of cancer. It is a fact that most chronic noninfectious diseases can be prevented. The chronic noninfectious diseases that cause the most deaths in many developed countries are largely preventable. These diseases are heart disease, stroke, diabetes and cancer, and though they do have some genetic components, they also have many lifestyle components. For example, some cancers have genetic risks, but people at high risk for cancers can have screening examinations to catch them early or sometimes can take other steps to prevent the cancers. Heart disease, stroke and diabetes are mostly linked to lifestyle choices, even when family history puts a person at higher risk for the diseases. Most allergies can be prevented by avoiding the substances that cause them. For example, you can avoid pollens by staying indoors as much as possible. You can learn to recognize plants like poison ivy and not touch them. A good way to remember how to avoid poison ivy is "leaves of three, let it be." Some people receive allergy shots to help prevent allergic reactions. The shots contain tiny amounts of allergens, which are the substances that cause an allergic reaction. After many months or years of shots, the immune system gets used to the allergens and no longer responds to them. Type 1 diabetes and other autoimmune diseases cannot be prevented. But choosing a healthy lifestyle can help prevent type 2 diabetes. Getting plenty of exercise, avoiding high-fat foods, and staying at a healthy weight can reduce the risk of developing this type of diabetes. This is especially important for people who have family members with the disease. Making these healthy lifestyle choices can also help prevent some types of cancer. In addition, you can lower the risk of cancer by avoiding carcinogens, which are substances that cause cancer. For example, you can reduce your risk of lung cancer by not smoking. You can reduce your risk of skin cancer by using sunscreen. How to choose a sunscreen that offers the most protection is explained below ( Figure 1.1). Some people think that tanning beds are a safe way to get a tan. This is a myth. Tanning beds expose the skin to UV radiation. Any exposure to UV radiation increases the risk of skin cancer. It doesnt matter whether the radiation comes from tanning lamps or the sun. Overall, people in many developed countries are contributing to higher rates of noninfectious diseases (heart disease, stroke, diabetes and cancer) by taking advantage of technology and social environments that encourage a less active lifestyle, and also encourages faster and cheaper meals. For example, many children now spend more time on their computer or watching TV then playing outdoors. The "faster and cheaper" meals are usually less healthy than other meals. Even though many people are living longer, they can choose to live more healthily by adopting regular exercise routines and healthy eating habits. When you choose a sunscreen, select one with an SPF (sun protection factor) of 30 or higher. Also, choose a sunscreen that protects against both UVB and UVA radiation. 	the use of tanning beds is a safe alternative to tanning in the sun	false
What goes into the cell? Oxygen and glucose are both reactants of cellular respiration. Oxygen enters the body when an organism breathes. Glucose enters the body when an organism eats. 	cellular respiration occurs in the chloroplast	false
What goes into the cell? Oxygen and glucose are both reactants of cellular respiration. Oxygen enters the body when an organism breathes. Glucose enters the body when an organism eats. 	cellular respiration only occurs in the absence of oxygen	false
Breathing is only part of the process of bringing oxygen to where it is needed in the body. After oxygen enters the lungs, what happens? 1. The oxygen enters the bloodstream from the alveoli, tiny sacs in the lungs where gas exchange takes place ( Figure 1.1). The transfer of oxygen into the blood is through simple diffusion. 2. The oxygen-rich blood returns to the heart. 3. Oxygen-rich blood is then pumped through the aorta, the large artery that receives blood directly from the heart. 4. From the aorta, oxygen-rich blood travels to the smaller arteries and, finally, to the capillaries, the smallest type of blood vessel. 5. The oxygen molecules move, by diffusion, out of the capillaries and into the body cells. 6. While oxygen moves from the capillaries and into body cells, carbon dioxide moves from the cells into the capillaries. Gas exchange is the movement of oxygen into the blood and carbon dioxide out of the blood. 7. Carbon dioxide is brought, through the blood, back to the heart and then to the lungs. Then it is released into the air during exhalation. Why is oxygen needed by each cell in your body? To make ATP, the usable form of cellular energy. Oxygen is needed in the final stage of cellular respiration, which is the process of converting glucose into ATP. This process is much more efficient in the presence of oxygen. Without oxygen, much less ATP is produced. As ATP is needed for the cells to function properly, every cell in your body needs oxygen. Getting that oxygen begins with inhaling. The oxygen moves into your blood, where it travels to every cell in your body. 	every cell in your body needs atp to make oxygen	false
Breathing is only part of the process of bringing oxygen to where it is needed in the body. After oxygen enters the lungs, what happens? 1. The oxygen enters the bloodstream from the alveoli, tiny sacs in the lungs where gas exchange takes place ( Figure 1.1). The transfer of oxygen into the blood is through simple diffusion. 2. The oxygen-rich blood returns to the heart. 3. Oxygen-rich blood is then pumped through the aorta, the large artery that receives blood directly from the heart. 4. From the aorta, oxygen-rich blood travels to the smaller arteries and, finally, to the capillaries, the smallest type of blood vessel. 5. The oxygen molecules move, by diffusion, out of the capillaries and into the body cells. 6. While oxygen moves from the capillaries and into body cells, carbon dioxide moves from the cells into the capillaries. Gas exchange is the movement of oxygen into the blood and carbon dioxide out of the blood. 7. Carbon dioxide is brought, through the blood, back to the heart and then to the lungs. Then it is released into the air during exhalation. Why is oxygen needed by each cell in your body? To make ATP, the usable form of cellular energy. Oxygen is needed in the final stage of cellular respiration, which is the process of converting glucose into ATP. This process is much more efficient in the presence of oxygen. Without oxygen, much less ATP is produced. As ATP is needed for the cells to function properly, every cell in your body needs oxygen. Getting that oxygen begins with inhaling. The oxygen moves into your blood, where it travels to every cell in your body. 	the lungs pump oxygen to every cell in your body	false
Energy is the ability to do work. In organisms, this work can be physical work, like walking or jumping, or it can be the work used to carry out the chemical processes in their cells. Every biochemical reaction that occurs in an organisms cells needs energy. All organisms need a constant supply of energy to stay alive. Some organisms can get the energy directly from the sun. Other organisms get their energy from other organisms. Through predator-prey relationships, the energy of one organism is passed on to another. Energy is constantly flowing through a community. With just a few exceptions, all life on Earth depends on the suns energy for survival. The energy of the sun is first captured by producers ( Figure 1.1), organisms that can make their own food. Many producers make their own food through the process of photosynthesis. The "food" the producers make is the sugar, glucose. Producers make food for the rest of the ecosystem. As energy is not recycled, energy must consistently be captured by producers. This energy is then passed on to the organisms that eat the producers, and then to the organisms that eat those organisms, and so on. Recall that the only required ingredients needed for photosynthesis are sunlight, carbon dioxide (CO2 ), and wa- ter (H2 O). From these simple inorganic ingredients, photosynthetic organisms produce the carbohydrate glucose (C6 H12 O6 ), and other complex organic compounds. Essentially, these producers are changing the energy from the sunlight into a usable form of energy. They are also making the oxygen that we breathe. Oxygen is a waste product of photosynthesis. The survival of every ecosystem is dependent on the producers. Without producers capturing the energy from the sun and turning it into glucose, an ecosystem could not exist. On land, plants are the dominant producers. Phytoplankton, tiny photosynthetic organisms, are the most common producers in the oceans and lakes. Algae, which is the green layer you might see floating on a pond, are an example of phytoplankton. There are also bacteria that use chemical processes to produce food. They get their energy from sources other than the sun, but they are still called producers. This process is known as chemosynthesis, and is common in ecosystems without sunlight, such as certain marine ecosystems. Producers include (a) plants, (b) algae, and (c) diatoms. 	most producers make glucose through photosynthesis	true
Energy is the ability to do work. In organisms, this work can be physical work, like walking or jumping, or it can be the work used to carry out the chemical processes in their cells. Every biochemical reaction that occurs in an organisms cells needs energy. All organisms need a constant supply of energy to stay alive. Some organisms can get the energy directly from the sun. Other organisms get their energy from other organisms. Through predator-prey relationships, the energy of one organism is passed on to another. Energy is constantly flowing through a community. With just a few exceptions, all life on Earth depends on the suns energy for survival. The energy of the sun is first captured by producers ( Figure 1.1), organisms that can make their own food. Many producers make their own food through the process of photosynthesis. The "food" the producers make is the sugar, glucose. Producers make food for the rest of the ecosystem. As energy is not recycled, energy must consistently be captured by producers. This energy is then passed on to the organisms that eat the producers, and then to the organisms that eat those organisms, and so on. Recall that the only required ingredients needed for photosynthesis are sunlight, carbon dioxide (CO2 ), and wa- ter (H2 O). From these simple inorganic ingredients, photosynthetic organisms produce the carbohydrate glucose (C6 H12 O6 ), and other complex organic compounds. Essentially, these producers are changing the energy from the sunlight into a usable form of energy. They are also making the oxygen that we breathe. Oxygen is a waste product of photosynthesis. The survival of every ecosystem is dependent on the producers. Without producers capturing the energy from the sun and turning it into glucose, an ecosystem could not exist. On land, plants are the dominant producers. Phytoplankton, tiny photosynthetic organisms, are the most common producers in the oceans and lakes. Algae, which is the green layer you might see floating on a pond, are an example of phytoplankton. There are also bacteria that use chemical processes to produce food. They get their energy from sources other than the sun, but they are still called producers. This process is known as chemosynthesis, and is common in ecosystems without sunlight, such as certain marine ecosystems. Producers include (a) plants, (b) algae, and (c) diatoms. 	energy is recycled through an ecosystem	false
Puberty is the stage of life when a child becomes sexually mature. Puberty lasts from about 12 to 18 years of age in boys and from about 10 to 16 years of age in girls. The age when puberty begins is different from one child to another. Children that begin puberty much earlier or later than their peers may feel self-conscious. They may also worry that something is wrong with them. Usually, an early or late puberty is perfectly normal. In boys, puberty begins when the pituitary gland tells the testes to secrete testosterone. Testosterone causes the following to happen: 1. 2. 3. 4. The penis and testes grow. The testes start making sperm. Pubic and facial hair grow. The shoulders broaden, and the voice becomes deeper. In girls, puberty begins when the pituitary gland tells the ovaries to secrete estrogen. Estrogen causes the following to happen: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. The uterus and ovaries grow. The ovaries start releasing eggs. The menstrual cycle begins. Pubic hair grows. The hips widen, and the breasts develop. Boys and girls are close to the same height during childhood. In both boys and girls, growth in height and weight is very fast during puberty. But boys grow faster than girls during puberty. Their period of fast growth also lasts longer. By the end of puberty, boys are an average of 10 centimeters (4 inches) taller than girls. 	puberty normally starts earlier in boys	false
Adolescence is the period of life between the start of puberty and the beginning of adulthood. Adolescence includes the physical changes of puberty. It also includes many other changes, including significant mental, emotional, and social changes. During adolescence: Teenagers develop new thinking abilities. For example, they can think about abstract ideas, such as freedom. They are also better at thinking logically. They are usually better at solving problems as well. Teenagers try to establish a sense of who they are as individuals. They may try to become more independent from their parents. Most teens also have emotional ups and downs. This is partly due to changing hormone levels. Teenagers usually spend much more time with peers than with family members. 	adolescence normally begins around age 14	false
Recombinant DNA is the combination of DNA from two different sources. For example, it is possible to place a human gene into bacterial DNA. Recombinant DNA technology is useful in gene cloning and in identifying the function of a gene. Recombinant DNA technology can also be used to produce useful proteins, such as insulin. To treat diabetes, many people need insulin. Previously, insulin had been taken from animals. Through recombinant DNA technology, bacteria were created that carry the human gene which codes for the production of insulin. These bacteria become tiny factories that produce this protein. Recombinant DNA technology helps create insulin so it can be used by humans. Recombinant DNA technology is used in gene cloning. A clone is an exact genetic copy. Genes are cloned for many reasons, including use in medicine and in agriculture. Below are the steps used to copy, or clone, a gene: 1. A gene or piece of DNA is put in a vector, or carrier molecule, producing a recombinant DNA molecule. 2. The vector is placed into a host cell, such as a bacterium. 3. The gene is copied (or cloned) inside of the bacterium. As the bacterial DNA is copied, so is the vector DNA. As the bacteria divide, the recombinant DNA molecules are divided between the new cells. Over a 12- to 24-hour period, millions of copies of the cloned DNA are made. 4. The cloned DNA can produce a protein (like insulin) that can be used in medicine or in research. 	a clone can be a fairly close genetic copy	false
Bacteria have small rings of DNA in the cytoplasm, called plasmids ( Figure 1.1). A plasmid is not part of the bacterial chromosome, but an additional pieced of DNA. When putting foreign DNA into a bacterium, the plasmids are often used as a vector. Viruses can also be used as vectors. The manipulation of the plasmid DNA, and then the insertion of the recombinant plasmid into a bacterium, is an invaluable tool in scientific research. This image shows a drawing of a plasmid. The plasmid has two large segments and one small segment depicted. The two large segments (green and blue) indicate antibiotic resistances usually used in a screening procedure. The antibiotic resis- tance segments ensure only bacteria with the plasmid will grow. The small segment (red) indicates an origin of replication. The origin of replication is where DNA replication starts, copying the plasmid. 	a plasmid is a chromosome from a bacterium	false
Why conserve resources? During your lifetime, it is possible that the world may run out of some nonrenewable resources, especially as the population passes 8 then 9 billion people. So it is necessary to try to make these resources last as long as possible. You may have heard people say, "Reduce, Reuse, Recycle." You may know that this is the slogan of the campaign to conserve resources. But what do each one of those words truly mean? 	the worlds population is growing so fast that resources are becoming limited	true
Now we move on to recycle. Sometimes it may be difficult to understand the differences between reusing and recycling. Recycling involves processing used materials in order to make them suitable for other uses. That usually means taking a used item, breaking it down, and reusing the pieces. Even though recycling requires extra energy, it does often make use of items which are broken, worn out, or cannot be reused. The things that are commonly recycled include: Batteries. Biodegradable waste. Electronics. Iron and steel. Aluminum ( Figure 1.2). Glass. Paper. Plastic. Textiles, such as clothing. Timber. Tires. Each type of recyclable requires a different recycling technique. Here are some things you can do to recycle in your home, school, or community: Laws can also be created to make sure people and companies reduce, reuse, and recycle. Individuals can vote for leaders who stand for sustainable ecological practices. They can also tell their leaders to make wise use of natural resources. You can also influence companies. If you and your family only buy from companies and restaurants that support recycling or eco-friendly packaging, then other companies will also change to be more environmentally friendly. 	reusing means processing used materials in order to make them suitable for other uses	false
A resource is renewable if it is remade by natural processes at the same rate that humans use it up. Sunlight and wind are renewable resources because they will not be used up ( Figure 1.1). The rising and falling of ocean tides is another example of a resource in unlimited supply. A sustainable resource is a resource that is used in a way that meets the needs of the present without keeping future generations from meeting their needs. People can sustainably harvest wood, cork, and bamboo. Farmers can also grow crops sustainably by not planting the same crop in their soil year after year. Planting the same crop each year can remove nutrients from the soil. This means that wood, cork, bamboo, and crops can be sustainable resources. 	the ocean tides are a renewable resource	true
Scientists at the Massachusetts of Technology are turning trash into coal, which can readily be used to heat homes and cook food in developing countries. This coal burns cleaner than that from fossil fuels. It also save a tremendous amount of energy. See http://youtu.be/GzhFgEYiVyY?list=PLzMhsCgGKd1hoofiKuifwy6qRXZs7NG6a for more information. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	fossil fuels are an example of nonrenewable resources	true
As was discussed in previous concepts, both infectious and noninfectious diseases of the reproductive system can be very serious. But there are ways to keep your reproductive system healthy. What can you do to keep your reproductive system healthy? You can start by making the right choices for overall good health. To be as healthy as you can be, you should: Eat a balanced diet that is high in fiber and low in fat. Drink plenty of water. Get regular exercise. Maintain a healthy weight. Get enough sleep. Avoid using tobacco, alcohol, or other drugs. Manage stress in healthy ways. Keeping your genitals clean is also very important. A daily shower or bath is all that it takes. Females do not need to use special feminine hygiene products. In fact, using them may do more harm than good because they can irritate the vagina or other reproductive structures. You should also avoid other behaviors that can put you at risk. Do not get into contact with another persons blood or other body fluids. For example, never get a tattoo or piercing unless you are sure that the needles have not been used before. This is one of the most important ways to prevent an STI. Of course, the only way to be fully protected against STIs is to refrain from sexual activity. If you are a boy, you should always wear a protective cup when you play contact sports. Contact sports include football, boxing, and hockey. Wearing a cup will help protect the testes from injury. You should also do a monthly self-exam to check for cancer of the testes. If you are a girl and use tampons, be sure to change them every four to six hours. Leaving tampons in for too long can put you at risk of toxic shock syndrome. This is a serious condition. Signs and symptoms of toxic shock syndrome develop suddenly, and the disease can be fatal. The disease involves fever, shock, and problems with the function of several body organs. Girls should also get in the habit of doing a monthly self-exam to check for breast cancer. Although breast cancer is rare in teens, its a good idea to start doing the exam when you are young. It will help you get to know what is normal for you. 	girls should use feminine hygiene products on a regular basis	false
As was discussed in previous concepts, both infectious and noninfectious diseases of the reproductive system can be very serious. But there are ways to keep your reproductive system healthy. What can you do to keep your reproductive system healthy? You can start by making the right choices for overall good health. To be as healthy as you can be, you should: Eat a balanced diet that is high in fiber and low in fat. Drink plenty of water. Get regular exercise. Maintain a healthy weight. Get enough sleep. Avoid using tobacco, alcohol, or other drugs. Manage stress in healthy ways. Keeping your genitals clean is also very important. A daily shower or bath is all that it takes. Females do not need to use special feminine hygiene products. In fact, using them may do more harm than good because they can irritate the vagina or other reproductive structures. You should also avoid other behaviors that can put you at risk. Do not get into contact with another persons blood or other body fluids. For example, never get a tattoo or piercing unless you are sure that the needles have not been used before. This is one of the most important ways to prevent an STI. Of course, the only way to be fully protected against STIs is to refrain from sexual activity. If you are a boy, you should always wear a protective cup when you play contact sports. Contact sports include football, boxing, and hockey. Wearing a cup will help protect the testes from injury. You should also do a monthly self-exam to check for cancer of the testes. If you are a girl and use tampons, be sure to change them every four to six hours. Leaving tampons in for too long can put you at risk of toxic shock syndrome. This is a serious condition. Signs and symptoms of toxic shock syndrome develop suddenly, and the disease can be fatal. The disease involves fever, shock, and problems with the function of several body organs. Girls should also get in the habit of doing a monthly self-exam to check for breast cancer. Although breast cancer is rare in teens, its a good idea to start doing the exam when you are young. It will help you get to know what is normal for you. 	a daily shower or bath protects the reproductive system	true
The process of getting oxygen into the body and releasing carbon dioxide is called respiration. Sometimes breathing is called respiration, but there is much more to respiration than just breathing. Breathing is only the movement of oxygen into the body and carbon dioxide out of the body. The process of respiration also includes the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between the blood and the cells of the body. 	breathing is controlled by the part of the brain that also controls your heartbeat	true
The process of getting oxygen into the body and releasing carbon dioxide is called respiration. Sometimes breathing is called respiration, but there is much more to respiration than just breathing. Breathing is only the movement of oxygen into the body and carbon dioxide out of the body. The process of respiration also includes the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between the blood and the cells of the body. 	there is not much more to respiration than just breathing	false
Respiratory diseases are diseases of the lungs, bronchial tubes, trachea, nose, and throat ( Figure 1.1). These diseases can range from a mild cold to a severe case of pneumonia. Respiratory diseases are common. Many are easily treated, while others may cause severe illness or death. Some respiratory diseases are caused by bacteria or viruses, while others are caused by environmental pollutants, such as tobacco smoke. Some diseases are genetic and, therefore, are inherited. This boy is suffering from whooping cough (also known as pertussis), which gets its name from the loud whooping sound that is made when the person inhales during a coughing fit. 	the common cold and flu are respiratory illnesses caused by viruses	true
Many respiratory diseases are caused by pathogens. A pathogen is an organism that causes disease in another organism. Certain bacteria, viruses, and fungi are pathogens of the respiratory system. The common cold and flu are caused by viruses. The influenza virus that causes the flu is pictured below ( Figure 1.6). Tuberculosis, whooping cough, and acute bronchitis are caused by bacteria. The pathogens that cause colds, flu, and TB can be passed from person to person by coughing, sneezing, and spitting. Illnesses caused by bacteria can be treated with antibiotics. Those caused by viruses cannot. Pollution is another common cause of respiratory disease. The quality of the air you breathe can affect the health of your lungs. Asthma, heart and lung diseases, allergies, and several types of cancers are all linked to air quality. Air pollution is not just found outdoors; indoor air pollution can also be responsible for health problems. Smoking is the major cause of chronic respiratory disease as well as cardiovascular disease and cancer. Exposure to tobacco smoke by smoking or by breathing air that contains tobacco smoke is the leading cause of preventable death in the United States. Regular smokers die about 10 years earlier than nonsmokers do. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) describes tobacco use as "the single most important preventable risk to human health The lung of a smoker who had emphysema (left). Tar, a sticky, black substance found in tobacco smoke, is evident. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (right), is a tobacco-related disease that is characterized by emphysema. This represents the influenza virus that causes the swine flu, or H1N1. The Center for Disease Control and Prevention recommends that children between the ages of 6 months and 19 years get a flu vaccination each year. in developed countries and an important cause of [early] death worldwide." Simply stated: Stopping smoking can prevent many respiratory diseases. 	stopping smoking can prevent many respiratory diseases	true
Cigarette smoking can cause serious diseases, so not smoking or quitting now are the most effective ways to reduce your risk of developing chronic respiratory diseases, such as lung cancer. Avoiding (or stopping) smoking is the single best way to prevent many respiratory and cardiovascular diseases. Also, do your best to avoid secondhand smoke. 	the same things often cause cardiovascular diseases and respiratory diseases	true
Eating healthy foods, getting enough sleep, and being active every day can help keep your respiratory system, cardiovascular system and immune system strong. Getting enough exercise makes your lungs stronger and better at giving your body the oxygen it needs. It also helps to boost your body fight germs that could make you sick. These can also, of course, keep your skeletal and muscular systems strong. 	do not go to school when you are sick	true
Your respiratory system is made up of the tissues and organs that allow oxygen to enter your body and carbon dioxide to leave your body. Organs in your respiratory system include your: Nose. Mouth. Larynx. Pharynx. Lungs. Diaphragm. The organs of the respiratory system move air into and out of the body. These structures are shown below (Figure 1.1). What do you think is the purpose of each of these organs? The nose and the nasal cavity filter, warm, and moisten the air you breathe. The nose hairs and the mucus produced by the cells in the nose catch particles in the air and keep them from entering the lungs. Behind the nasal cavity, air passes through the pharynx, a long tube. Both food and air pass through the pharynx. The larynx, also called the "voice box," is found just below the pharynx. Your voice comes from your larynx. Air from the lungs passes across thin tissues in the larynx and produces sound. The trachea, or windpipe, is a long tube that leads down to the lungs, where it divides into the right and left bronchi. The bronchi branch out into smaller bronchioles in each lung. There is small flap called the epiglottis that covers your trachea when you eat or drink. The muscle controlling the epiglottis is involuntary and prevents food from entering your lungs or wind pipe. The bronchioles lead to the alveoli. Alveoli are the little sacs at the end of the bronchioles (Figure 1.2). They look like little bunches of grapes. Oxygen is exchanged for carbon dioxide in the alveoli. That means oxygen enters the blood, and carbon dioxide moves out of the blood. The gases are exchanged between the blood and alveoli by simple diffusion. The diaphragm is a sheet of muscle that spreads across the bottom of the rib cage. When the diaphragm contracts, the chest volume gets larger, and the lungs take in air. When the diaphragm relaxes, the chest volume gets smaller, and air is pushed out of the lungs. "Grape-like" alveoli in the lungs. 	your nose is an organ of the respiratory system	true
Your respiratory system is made up of the tissues and organs that allow oxygen to enter your body and carbon dioxide to leave your body. Organs in your respiratory system include your: Nose. Mouth. Larynx. Pharynx. Lungs. Diaphragm. The organs of the respiratory system move air into and out of the body. These structures are shown below (Figure 1.1). What do you think is the purpose of each of these organs? The nose and the nasal cavity filter, warm, and moisten the air you breathe. The nose hairs and the mucus produced by the cells in the nose catch particles in the air and keep them from entering the lungs. Behind the nasal cavity, air passes through the pharynx, a long tube. Both food and air pass through the pharynx. The larynx, also called the "voice box," is found just below the pharynx. Your voice comes from your larynx. Air from the lungs passes across thin tissues in the larynx and produces sound. The trachea, or windpipe, is a long tube that leads down to the lungs, where it divides into the right and left bronchi. The bronchi branch out into smaller bronchioles in each lung. There is small flap called the epiglottis that covers your trachea when you eat or drink. The muscle controlling the epiglottis is involuntary and prevents food from entering your lungs or wind pipe. The bronchioles lead to the alveoli. Alveoli are the little sacs at the end of the bronchioles (Figure 1.2). They look like little bunches of grapes. Oxygen is exchanged for carbon dioxide in the alveoli. That means oxygen enters the blood, and carbon dioxide moves out of the blood. The gases are exchanged between the blood and alveoli by simple diffusion. The diaphragm is a sheet of muscle that spreads across the bottom of the rib cage. When the diaphragm contracts, the chest volume gets larger, and the lungs take in air. When the diaphragm relaxes, the chest volume gets smaller, and air is pushed out of the lungs. "Grape-like" alveoli in the lungs. 	food and air start by going down the same tube	true
DNA contains the instructions to create proteins, but it does not make proteins itself. DNA is located in the nucleus, which it never leaves, while proteins are made on ribosomes in the cytoplasm. So DNA needs a messenger to bring its instructions to a ribosome located outside of the nucleus. DNA sends out a message, in the form of RNA (ribonucleic acid), describing how to make the protein. There are three types of RNA directly involved in protein synthesis: Messenger RNA ( mRNA) carries the instructions from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. mRNA is produced in the nucleus, as are all RNAs. The other two forms of RNA, ribosomal RNA ( rRNA) and transfer RNA ( tRNA), are involved in the process of ordering the amino acids to make the protein. rRNA becomes part of the ribosome, which is the site of protein synthesis, and tRNA brings an amino acid to the ribosome so it can be added to a growing chain during protein synthesis. There are numerous tRNAs, as each tRNA is specific for an amino acid. The amino acid actually attaches to the tRNA during this process. More about RNAs will be discussed during the Transcription and Translation Concepts. All three RNAs are nucleic acids, made of nucleotides, similar to DNA ( Figure 1.1). The RNA nucleotide is different from the DNA nucleotide in the following ways: RNA contains a different kind of sugar, called ribose. In RNA, the base uracil (U) replaces the thymine (T) found in DNA. RNA is a single strand molecule. A comparison of DNA and RNA, with the bases of each shown. Notice that in RNA, uracil replaces thymine. 	dna is located in the nucleus and proteins are made in the cytoplasm	true
DNA contains the instructions to create proteins, but it does not make proteins itself. DNA is located in the nucleus, which it never leaves, while proteins are made on ribosomes in the cytoplasm. So DNA needs a messenger to bring its instructions to a ribosome located outside of the nucleus. DNA sends out a message, in the form of RNA (ribonucleic acid), describing how to make the protein. There are three types of RNA directly involved in protein synthesis: Messenger RNA ( mRNA) carries the instructions from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. mRNA is produced in the nucleus, as are all RNAs. The other two forms of RNA, ribosomal RNA ( rRNA) and transfer RNA ( tRNA), are involved in the process of ordering the amino acids to make the protein. rRNA becomes part of the ribosome, which is the site of protein synthesis, and tRNA brings an amino acid to the ribosome so it can be added to a growing chain during protein synthesis. There are numerous tRNAs, as each tRNA is specific for an amino acid. The amino acid actually attaches to the tRNA during this process. More about RNAs will be discussed during the Transcription and Translation Concepts. All three RNAs are nucleic acids, made of nucleotides, similar to DNA ( Figure 1.1). The RNA nucleotide is different from the DNA nucleotide in the following ways: RNA contains a different kind of sugar, called ribose. In RNA, the base uracil (U) replaces the thymine (T) found in DNA. RNA is a single strand molecule. A comparison of DNA and RNA, with the bases of each shown. Notice that in RNA, uracil replaces thymine. 	rna contains the bases a c u and t	false
The word "worm" is not very scientific. This informal term describes animals (usually invertebrates) that have long bodies with no arms or legs. Worms with round, non-segmented bodies are known as nematodes or roundworms ( Figure 1.1). They are classified in the phylum Nematoda, which has over 28,000 known species. Some scientists believe there could be over a million species of Nematodes. Nematodes are slender bilaterally symmetrical worms, typically less than 2.5 mm long. The smallest nematodes are microscopic, while free-living species can reach as much as 5 cm, and some parasitic species are larger still, reaching over a meter in length. The worm body is often covered with ridges, rings, bristles, or other distinctive structures. The radially symmetrical head of a nematode also has distinct features. The head is covered with sensory bristles and, in many cases, solid "head-shields" around the mouth region. The mouth has either three or six lips arranged around the mouth opening, which often have a series of teeth on their inner edges. Nematodes can be parasites of plants and animals. 	some worms can have six lips	true
Roundworms can be free-living organisms, but they are probably best known for their role as significant plant and animal parasites. Most Nematodes are parasitic, with over 16,000 parasitic species described. Heartworms, which cause serious disease in dogs while living in the heart and blood vessels, are a type of roundworm. Roundworms can also cause disease in humans. Elephantiasis, a disease characterized by the extreme swelling of the limbs ( Figure Most parasitic roundworm eggs or larvae are found in the soil and enter the human body when a person picks them up on the hands and then transfers them to the mouth. The eggs or larvae also can enter the human body directly through the skin. The best solution to these diseases is to try to prevent these diseases rather than treat or cure them. Diseases caused by roundworms are more common in developing countries. Many parasitic diseases caused by roundworms result from poor personal hygiene. Contributing factors may include lack of a clean water supply, inadequate sanitation measures, crowded living conditions, combined with a lack of access to health care and low levels of education. 	most nematodes are harmful	true
When you think of worms, you probably picture earthworms. There are actually many types of worms, including flatworms, roundworms, and segmented worms. Earthworms are segmented worms. Segmented worms are in the phylum Annelida, which has over 22,000 known species. These worms are known as the segmented worms because their bodies are segmented, or separated into repeating units. Besides the earthworm, the segmented worms also include leeches and some marine worms. Most segmented worms like the earthworm, feed on dead organic matter. Leeches (Figure 1.1), however, can live in fresh water and suck blood from their animal host. You may have noticed many earthworms in soil. Earthworms support terrestrial ecosystems both as prey and by aerating and enriching soil. 	most segmented worms feed on dead organic matter	true
The following table compares the three worm phyla (Table 1.1). Phylum Platyhelminthes Nematoda Annelida Common Name Flatworm Roundworm Segmented worm Body Cavity Segmented No Yes Yes No No Yes Digestive System Incomplete Complete Complete 	the leech is a segmented worm that feeds on live blood	true
What determines if a baby is a male or female? Recall that you have 23 pairs of chromosomesand one of those pairs is the sex chromosomes. Everyone has two sex chromosomes. Your sex chromosomes can be X or Y. Females have two X chromosomes (XX), while males have one X chromosome and one Y chromosome (XY). If a baby inherits an X chromosome from the father and an X chromosome from the mother, what will be the childs sex? The baby will have two X chromosomes, so it will be female. If the fathers sperm carries the Y chromosome, the child will be male. Notice that a mother can only pass on an X chromosome, so the sex of the baby is determined by the father. The father has a 50 percent chance of passing on the Y or X chromosome, so there is a 50 percent chance that a child will be male, and there is a 50 percent chance a child will be female. This 50:50 chance occurs for each baby. A couples first five children could all be boys. The sixth child still has a 50:50 chance of being a girl. One special pattern of inheritance that doesnt fit Mendels rules is sex-linked inheritance, referring to the inher- itance of traits that are located on genes on the sex chromosomes. Since males and females do not have the same sex chromosomes, there will be differences between the sexes in how these sex-linked traitstraits linked to genes located on the sex chromosomesare expressed. Sex-linked traits usually refer to traits due to genes on the X chromosome. One example of a sex-linked trait is red-green colorblindness. People with this type of colorblindness cannot tell the difference between red and green. They often see these colors as shades of brown ( Figure 1.1). Boys are much more likely to be colorblind than girls ( Table 1.1). This is because colorblindness is a sex-linked, recessive trait. Boys only have one X chromosome, so if that chromosome carries the gene for colorblindness, they will be colorblind. As girls have two X chromosomes, a girl can have one X chromosome with the colorblind gene and one X chromosome with a normal gene for color vision. Since colorblindness is recessive, the dominant normal gene will mask the recessive colorblind gene. Females with one colorblindness allele and one normal allele are referred to as carriers. They carry the allele but do not express it. How would a female become colorblind? She would have to inherit two genes for colorblindness, which is very unlikely. Many sex-linked traits are inherited in a recessive manner. Xc Xc X (carrier female) Xc Y (colorblind male) X Y X XX (normal female) XY (normal male) According to this Punnett square ( Table 1.1), the son of a woman who carries the colorblindness trait and a male with normal vision has a 50% chance of being colorblind. 	the mother determines the sex of her baby	false
What determines if a baby is a male or female? Recall that you have 23 pairs of chromosomesand one of those pairs is the sex chromosomes. Everyone has two sex chromosomes. Your sex chromosomes can be X or Y. Females have two X chromosomes (XX), while males have one X chromosome and one Y chromosome (XY). If a baby inherits an X chromosome from the father and an X chromosome from the mother, what will be the childs sex? The baby will have two X chromosomes, so it will be female. If the fathers sperm carries the Y chromosome, the child will be male. Notice that a mother can only pass on an X chromosome, so the sex of the baby is determined by the father. The father has a 50 percent chance of passing on the Y or X chromosome, so there is a 50 percent chance that a child will be male, and there is a 50 percent chance a child will be female. This 50:50 chance occurs for each baby. A couples first five children could all be boys. The sixth child still has a 50:50 chance of being a girl. One special pattern of inheritance that doesnt fit Mendels rules is sex-linked inheritance, referring to the inher- itance of traits that are located on genes on the sex chromosomes. Since males and females do not have the same sex chromosomes, there will be differences between the sexes in how these sex-linked traitstraits linked to genes located on the sex chromosomesare expressed. Sex-linked traits usually refer to traits due to genes on the X chromosome. One example of a sex-linked trait is red-green colorblindness. People with this type of colorblindness cannot tell the difference between red and green. They often see these colors as shades of brown ( Figure 1.1). Boys are much more likely to be colorblind than girls ( Table 1.1). This is because colorblindness is a sex-linked, recessive trait. Boys only have one X chromosome, so if that chromosome carries the gene for colorblindness, they will be colorblind. As girls have two X chromosomes, a girl can have one X chromosome with the colorblind gene and one X chromosome with a normal gene for color vision. Since colorblindness is recessive, the dominant normal gene will mask the recessive colorblind gene. Females with one colorblindness allele and one normal allele are referred to as carriers. They carry the allele but do not express it. How would a female become colorblind? She would have to inherit two genes for colorblindness, which is very unlikely. Many sex-linked traits are inherited in a recessive manner. Xc Xc X (carrier female) Xc Y (colorblind male) X Y X XX (normal female) XY (normal male) According to this Punnett square ( Table 1.1), the son of a woman who carries the colorblindness trait and a male with normal vision has a 50% chance of being colorblind. 	females have two x chromosomes	true
A sexually transmitted infection (STI) is an infection that spreads through sexual contact. STIs are caused by pathogens, a living thing or virus that causes infection. The pathogens enter the body through the reproductive organs. Many STIs also spread through body fluids, such as blood. For example, a shared tattoo needle is one way an STI could spread. Some STIs can also spread from a mother to her baby during childbirth. STIs are more common in teens and young adults than in older people. One reason is that young people are more likely to take risks. They also may not know how STIs spread. They are likely to believe myths about STIs ( Table Myth If you are sexually active with just one person, you cant get STIs. If you dont have any symptoms, then you dont have an STI. Getting STIs is no big deal, because STIs can be cured with medicine. Fact The only way to avoid the risk of STIs is to practice abstinence from sexual activity. Many STIs do not cause symptoms, especially in fe- males. Only some STIs can be cured with medicine; other STIs cannot be cured. Most STIs are caused by bacteria or viruses. STIs caused by bacteria usually can be cured with drugs called antibiotics. But antibiotics are not effective against viruses. Therefore, STIs caused by viruses are not treated with antibiotics. Other drugs may be used to help control the symptoms of viral STIs, but they cannot be cured. Once you have a viral STI, you are usually infected for life. 	many stis do not cause symptoms especially in females	true
A sexually transmitted infection (STI) is an infection that spreads through sexual contact. STIs are caused by pathogens, a living thing or virus that causes infection. The pathogens enter the body through the reproductive organs. Many STIs also spread through body fluids, such as blood. For example, a shared tattoo needle is one way an STI could spread. Some STIs can also spread from a mother to her baby during childbirth. STIs are more common in teens and young adults than in older people. One reason is that young people are more likely to take risks. They also may not know how STIs spread. They are likely to believe myths about STIs ( Table Myth If you are sexually active with just one person, you cant get STIs. If you dont have any symptoms, then you dont have an STI. Getting STIs is no big deal, because STIs can be cured with medicine. Fact The only way to avoid the risk of STIs is to practice abstinence from sexual activity. Many STIs do not cause symptoms, especially in fe- males. Only some STIs can be cured with medicine; other STIs cannot be cured. Most STIs are caused by bacteria or viruses. STIs caused by bacteria usually can be cured with drugs called antibiotics. But antibiotics are not effective against viruses. Therefore, STIs caused by viruses are not treated with antibiotics. Other drugs may be used to help control the symptoms of viral STIs, but they cannot be cured. Once you have a viral STI, you are usually infected for life. 	all stis can be cured	false
A joint is a point at which two or more bones meet. There are three main types of joints in the body: 1. Fixed joints do not allow any bone movement. Many of the joints in your skull are fixed ( Figure 1.1). There are eight bones that fuse together to form the cranium. The joints between these bones do not allow movement, which helps protect the brain. 2. Partly movable joints allow only a little movement. Your backbone has partly movable joints between the vertebrae ( Figure 1.2). The skull has fixed joints. Fixed joints do not allow any movement of the bones, which protects the brain from injury. 3. Movable joints allow the most movement. Movable joints are also the most common type of joint in your body. Your fingers, toes, hips, elbows, and knees all provide examples of movable joints. The surfaces of bones at movable joints are covered with a smooth layer of cartilage. The cartilage reduces friction between the bones. Ligaments often cross a joint, holding two nones together. For example, there are numerous ligaments connecting the leg bones across the knee joint. 	joint pain is a common problem as people age	true
A joint is a point at which two or more bones meet. There are three main types of joints in the body: 1. Fixed joints do not allow any bone movement. Many of the joints in your skull are fixed ( Figure 1.1). There are eight bones that fuse together to form the cranium. The joints between these bones do not allow movement, which helps protect the brain. 2. Partly movable joints allow only a little movement. Your backbone has partly movable joints between the vertebrae ( Figure 1.2). The skull has fixed joints. Fixed joints do not allow any movement of the bones, which protects the brain from injury. 3. Movable joints allow the most movement. Movable joints are also the most common type of joint in your body. Your fingers, toes, hips, elbows, and knees all provide examples of movable joints. The surfaces of bones at movable joints are covered with a smooth layer of cartilage. The cartilage reduces friction between the bones. Ligaments often cross a joint, holding two nones together. For example, there are numerous ligaments connecting the leg bones across the knee joint. 	all joints allow bones to move	false
Did you know that you see the largest organ in your body every day? You wash it, dry it, cover it up to stay warm, and uncover it to cool off. Yes, your skin is your bodys largest organ. Your skin is part of your integumentary system ( Figure 1.1), which is the outer covering of your body. The integumentary system is made up of your skin, hair, and nails. Skin acts as a barrier that stops water and other things, like soap and dirt, from getting into your body. 	your skin is the largest organ in your body	true
Your skin is always exposed to your external environment, so it gets cut, scratched, and worn down. You also naturally shed many skin cells every day. Your body replaces damaged or missing skin cells by growing more of them. Did you know that the layer of skin you can see is actually dead? As the dead cells are shed or removed from the upper layer, they are replaced by the skin cells below them. Two different layers make up the skin: the epidermis and the dermis ( Figure 1.2). A fatty layer lies under the dermis, but it is not part of your skin. 	the layer of skin you can see is actually dead cells	true
The muscular system consists of all the muscles in the body. This is the body system that allows us to move. You also depend on many muscles to keep you alive. Your heart, which is mostly muscle, pumps blood around your body. Each muscle in the body is made up of cells called muscle fibers. Muscle fibers are long, thin cells that can do something that other cells cannot dothey are able to get shorter. Shortening of muscle fibers is called contraction. Muscle fibers can contract because they are made of proteins, called actin and myosin, that form long filaments (or fibers). When muscles contract, these protein filaments slide or glide past one another, shortening the length of the cell. When your muscles relax, the length extends back to the previous position. Nearly all movement in the body is the result of muscle contraction. You can control some muscle movements. However, certain muscle movements happen without you thinking about them. Muscles that are under your conscious control are called voluntary muscles. Muscles that are not under your conscious control are called involuntary muscles. Muscle tissue is one of the four types of tissue found in animals. There are three different types of muscle in the body ( Figure 1.1): 1. Skeletal muscle is made up of voluntary muscles, usually attached to the skeleton. Skeletal muscles move the body. They can also contract involuntarily by reflexes. For example, you can choose to move your arm, but your arm would move automatically if you were to burn your finger on a stove top. This voluntary contraction begins with a thought process. A signal from your brain tells your muscles to contract or relax. Quickly contract and relax the muscles in your fingers a few times. Think about how quickly these signals must travel throughout your body to make this happen. 2. Smooth muscle is composed of involuntary muscles found within the walls of organs and structures such as the esophagus, stomach, intestines, and blood vessels. These muscles push materials like food or blood through organs. Unlike skeletal muscle, smooth muscle can never be under your control. 3. Cardiac muscle is also an involuntary muscle, found only in the heart. The cardiac muscle fibers all contract together, generating enough force to push blood throughout the body. What would happen if this muscle was under conscious or voluntary control? There are three types of muscles in the body: cardiac, skeletal, and smooth. 	your body has only three types of muscles	true
The muscular system consists of all the muscles in the body. This is the body system that allows us to move. You also depend on many muscles to keep you alive. Your heart, which is mostly muscle, pumps blood around your body. Each muscle in the body is made up of cells called muscle fibers. Muscle fibers are long, thin cells that can do something that other cells cannot dothey are able to get shorter. Shortening of muscle fibers is called contraction. Muscle fibers can contract because they are made of proteins, called actin and myosin, that form long filaments (or fibers). When muscles contract, these protein filaments slide or glide past one another, shortening the length of the cell. When your muscles relax, the length extends back to the previous position. Nearly all movement in the body is the result of muscle contraction. You can control some muscle movements. However, certain muscle movements happen without you thinking about them. Muscles that are under your conscious control are called voluntary muscles. Muscles that are not under your conscious control are called involuntary muscles. Muscle tissue is one of the four types of tissue found in animals. There are three different types of muscle in the body ( Figure 1.1): 1. Skeletal muscle is made up of voluntary muscles, usually attached to the skeleton. Skeletal muscles move the body. They can also contract involuntarily by reflexes. For example, you can choose to move your arm, but your arm would move automatically if you were to burn your finger on a stove top. This voluntary contraction begins with a thought process. A signal from your brain tells your muscles to contract or relax. Quickly contract and relax the muscles in your fingers a few times. Think about how quickly these signals must travel throughout your body to make this happen. 2. Smooth muscle is composed of involuntary muscles found within the walls of organs and structures such as the esophagus, stomach, intestines, and blood vessels. These muscles push materials like food or blood through organs. Unlike skeletal muscle, smooth muscle can never be under your control. 3. Cardiac muscle is also an involuntary muscle, found only in the heart. The cardiac muscle fibers all contract together, generating enough force to push blood throughout the body. What would happen if this muscle was under conscious or voluntary control? There are three types of muscles in the body: cardiac, skeletal, and smooth. 	you cannot stop a reflex muscle contraction	true
While to many people clean water may seem limitless and everywhere, to many others this is not so. Water pollution is a serious issue facing hundreds of millions of people world-wide, having harmful effects on the lives of those people. Water is not in unlimited supply and cannot just be made fresh when it is wanted. Water is actually a limited resource, and for many people, fresh, unpolluted water is hard to find. A limited resource is one that we use faster than we can remake it. It is a resource that can be used up. Water pollution happens when contaminants enter water bodies. Contaminants are any substances that harm the health of the environment or humans. Most contaminants enter the water because of humans. Surface water (river or lake) can be exposed to and contaminated by acid rain, storm water runoff, pesticide runoff, and industrial waste. This water is cleaned somewhat by exposure to sunlight, aeration, and microorganisms in the water. Groundwater (private wells and some public water supplies) generally takes longer to become contaminated, but the natural clean- ing process also may take much longer. Groundwater can be contaminated by disease-producing pathogens, careless disposal of hazardous household chemical-containing products, agricultural chemicals, and leaking underground storage tanks. Water pollution can cause harmful effects to ecology and human health. Shown is the pollution in Jakarta, Indonesia. Natural events, like storms, volcanic eruptions and earthquakes can cause major changes in water quality. But human-caused contaminants have a much greater impact on the quality of the water supply. Water is considered polluted either when it does not support a human use, like clean drinking water, or a use for other animals and plants. The overgrowth of algae, known as an algal bloom, can result from the runoff of fertilizer into bodies of water. This excess of nutrients allows the algae to grow beyond control, bring harm to the rest of the ecosystem. The main sources of water pollution can be grouped into two categories: Point source pollution results from the contaminants that enter a waterway or water body through a single site. Examples of this include untreated sewage, wastewater from a sewage treatment plant, and leaking underground tanks. Nonpoint source pollution is contamination that does not come from a single point source. Instead, it happens when there is a buildup of small amounts of contaminants that collect from a large area. Examples of this include fertilizer runoff from many farms flowing into groundwater or streams. 	water is an unlimited resource	false
While to many people clean water may seem limitless and everywhere, to many others this is not so. Water pollution is a serious issue facing hundreds of millions of people world-wide, having harmful effects on the lives of those people. Water is not in unlimited supply and cannot just be made fresh when it is wanted. Water is actually a limited resource, and for many people, fresh, unpolluted water is hard to find. A limited resource is one that we use faster than we can remake it. It is a resource that can be used up. Water pollution happens when contaminants enter water bodies. Contaminants are any substances that harm the health of the environment or humans. Most contaminants enter the water because of humans. Surface water (river or lake) can be exposed to and contaminated by acid rain, storm water runoff, pesticide runoff, and industrial waste. This water is cleaned somewhat by exposure to sunlight, aeration, and microorganisms in the water. Groundwater (private wells and some public water supplies) generally takes longer to become contaminated, but the natural clean- ing process also may take much longer. Groundwater can be contaminated by disease-producing pathogens, careless disposal of hazardous household chemical-containing products, agricultural chemicals, and leaking underground storage tanks. Water pollution can cause harmful effects to ecology and human health. Shown is the pollution in Jakarta, Indonesia. Natural events, like storms, volcanic eruptions and earthquakes can cause major changes in water quality. But human-caused contaminants have a much greater impact on the quality of the water supply. Water is considered polluted either when it does not support a human use, like clean drinking water, or a use for other animals and plants. The overgrowth of algae, known as an algal bloom, can result from the runoff of fertilizer into bodies of water. This excess of nutrients allows the algae to grow beyond control, bring harm to the rest of the ecosystem. The main sources of water pollution can be grouped into two categories: Point source pollution results from the contaminants that enter a waterway or water body through a single site. Examples of this include untreated sewage, wastewater from a sewage treatment plant, and leaking underground tanks. Nonpoint source pollution is contamination that does not come from a single point source. Instead, it happens when there is a buildup of small amounts of contaminants that collect from a large area. Examples of this include fertilizer runoff from many farms flowing into groundwater or streams. 	many people do not have access to fresh unpolluted water	true
Your sense of smell also involves sensory neurons that sense chemicals. The neurons are found in the nose, and they detect chemicals in the air. Unlike taste neurons, which can detect only five different tastes, the sensory neurons in the nose can detect thousands of different odors. Have you ever noticed that you lose your sense of taste when your nose is stuffed up? Thats because your sense of smell greatly affects your ability to taste food. As you eat, molecules of food chemicals enter your nose (actually your nasal cavity). You experience the taste and smell at the same time. Being able to smell as well as taste food greatly increases the number of different flavors you are able to sense. For example, you can use your sense of taste alone to learn that a food is sweet, but you have to also use your sense of smell to learn that the food tastes like strawberry cheesecake. Specific scents are often associated with our memories of places and events. Thats because scents are more novel or specific than shapes or other things you might see. So an odor similar to that of your grandmothers kitchen or pantry might be more quickly associated with your memories of that place than a similar sight, which might be more generalized. 	there are five main tastes that humans can perceive	true
The senses of taste and smell are more complicated than many people might think and have a surprisingly large impact on behavior, perception and overall health. Imagine your sense of smell disappearing as you age. Though this doesnt usually happen, it could provide clues about diseases of the nervous system. What about differences in taste? Do all foods taste the same to all people? Are there some foods you would never eat because you dont like the taste? Does this food taste good to other people? Genetic differences in taste could help predict what we eat, how well our metabolism works, and even whether or not were overweight. These two senses actually work together to provide some of the basic sensations of everyday life. 	you are able to sense many different flavors because of your sense of smell	true
Millions of years ago, there were so many dead plants and animals that they could not completely decompose before they were buried. They were covered over by soil or sand, tar or ice. These dead plants and animals are organic matter made out of cells full of carbon-containing organic compounds (carbohydrates, lipids, proteins and nucleic acids). What happened to all this carbon? When organic matter is under pressure for millions of years, it forms fossil fuels. Fossil fuels are coal, oil, and natural gas. When humans dig up and use fossil fuels, we have an impact on the carbon cycle ( Figure 1.2). This carbon is not recycled until it is used by humans. The burning of fossil fuels releases more carbon dioxide into the atmosphere than is used by photosynthesis. So, there is more carbon dioxide entering the atmosphere than is coming out of it. Carbon dioxide is known as a greenhouse gas, since it lets in light energy but does not let heat escape, much like the panes of a greenhouse. The increase of greenhouse gasses in the atmosphere is contributing to a global rise in Earths temperature, known as global warming or global climate change. 	carbon is necessary for living organisms to make organic compounds	true
Millions of years ago, there were so many dead plants and animals that they could not completely decompose before they were buried. They were covered over by soil or sand, tar or ice. These dead plants and animals are organic matter made out of cells full of carbon-containing organic compounds (carbohydrates, lipids, proteins and nucleic acids). What happened to all this carbon? When organic matter is under pressure for millions of years, it forms fossil fuels. Fossil fuels are coal, oil, and natural gas. When humans dig up and use fossil fuels, we have an impact on the carbon cycle ( Figure 1.2). This carbon is not recycled until it is used by humans. The burning of fossil fuels releases more carbon dioxide into the atmosphere than is used by photosynthesis. So, there is more carbon dioxide entering the atmosphere than is coming out of it. Carbon dioxide is known as a greenhouse gas, since it lets in light energy but does not let heat escape, much like the panes of a greenhouse. The increase of greenhouse gasses in the atmosphere is contributing to a global rise in Earths temperature, known as global warming or global climate change. 	people are able to make the carbon they need for their cells	false
Like water and carbon, nitrogen is also repeatedly recycled through the biosphere. This process is called the nitrogen cycle. Nitrogen is one of the most common elements in living organisms. It is important for creating both proteins and nucleic acids, like DNA. The air that we breathe is mostly nitrogen gas (N2 ), but, unfortunately, animals and plants cannot use the nitrogen when it is a gas. In fact, plants often die from a lack of nitrogen even through they are surrounded by plenty of nitrogen gas. Nitrogen gas (N2 ) has two nitrogen atoms connected by a very strong triple bond. Most plants and animals cannot use the nitrogen in nitrogen gas because they cannot break that triple bond. In order for plants to make use of nitrogen, it must be transformed into molecules they can use. This can be accomplished several different ways ( Figure 1.1). Lightning: When lightening strikes, nitrogen gas is transformed into nitrate (NO3  ) that plants can use. Nitrogen fixation: Special nitrogen-fixing bacteria can also transform nitrogen gas into useful forms. These bacteria live in the roots of plants in the pea family. They turn the nitrogen gas into ammonium (NH4 + ) (a process called ammonification). In water environments, bacteria in the water can also fix nitrogen gas into ammonium. Ammonium can be used by aquatic plants as a source of nitrogen. Nitrogen also is released to the environment by decaying organisms or decaying wastes. These wastes release nitrogen in the form of ammonium. Ammonium in the soil can be turned into nitrate by a two-step process completed by two different types of bacteria. In the form of nitrate, nitrogen can be used by plants through the process of assimilation. It is then passed along to animals when they eat the plants. 	nitrogen is important for creating both proteins and carbohydrates	false
Turning nitrate back into nitrogen gas, the process of denitrification, happens through the work of denitrifying bacteria. These bacteria often live in swamps and lakes. They take in the nitrate and release it back to the atmosphere as nitrogen gas. Just like the carbon cycle, human activities impact the nitrogen cycle. These human activities include the burning of fossil fuels, which release nitrogen oxide gasses into the atmosphere. Releasing nitrogen oxide back into the atmosphere leads to problems like acid rain. 	most plants and animals cannot use the nitrogen in nitrogen gas	true
Water also moves through the living organisms in an ecosystem. Plants soak up large amounts of water through their roots. The water then moves up the plant and evaporates from the leaves in a process called transpiration. The process of transpiration, like evaporation, returns water back into the atmosphere. 	the water cycle recycles water through both the living and nonliving parts of an ecosystem	true
Most precipitation that occurs over land, however, is not absorbed by the soil and is called runoff. This runoff collects in streams and rivers and eventually flows back into the ocean. 	the water cycle always starts with water evaporating from the ocean or lakes	false
Geologists and other Earth scientists use geologic time scales to describe when events happened in the history of Earth. The time scales can be used to show when both geologic events and events affecting plant and animal life occurred. The geologic time scale pictured below ( Figure 1.1) illustrates the timing of events like: Earthquakes. Volcanic eruptions. Major erosion. Meteorites hitting Earth. The first signs of life forms. Mass extinctions. 	life on earth began about 35 to 4 million years ago	false
For life to evolve from simple single-celled organisms to many millions of species of prokaryotic species to simple eukaryotic species to all the protists, fungi, plants, and animals, took some time. Well over 3 billion years. 	most life is made of small relatively simple singlecelled organisms	true
Our sense of touch is controlled by a huge network of nerve endings and touch receptors. This system is responsible for all the sensations we feel, including cold, hot, smooth, rough, pressure, tickle, itch, pain, vibrations, and more. There are four main types of receptors: mechanoreceptors, thermoreceptors, pain receptors, and proprioceptors. Mechanoreceptors perceive sensations such as pressure, vibrations, and texture. Your brain gets an enormous amount of information about the texture of objects through your fingertips because the ridges that make up your fingerprints are full of these sensitive receptors. Thermoreceptors perceive sensations related to the temperature of objects. There are two basic categories of thermoreceptors: hot receptors and cold receptors. The highest concentration of thermoreceptors can be found in the face and ears. Pain receptors, or nociceptor detect pain or stimuli that can or does cause damage to the skin and other tissues of the body. There are over three million pain receptors throughout the body, found in skin, muscles, bones, blood vessels, and some organs. Proprioceptors detect the position of different parts of the body in relation to each other and the surrounding environment. These receptors are found in joints, tendons and muscles, and allow us to do fundamental things such as feeding or clothing ourselves. 	all reactions due to touch are controlled by the brain	false
Our sense of touch is controlled by a huge network of nerve endings and touch receptors. This system is responsible for all the sensations we feel, including cold, hot, smooth, rough, pressure, tickle, itch, pain, vibrations, and more. There are four main types of receptors: mechanoreceptors, thermoreceptors, pain receptors, and proprioceptors. Mechanoreceptors perceive sensations such as pressure, vibrations, and texture. Your brain gets an enormous amount of information about the texture of objects through your fingertips because the ridges that make up your fingerprints are full of these sensitive receptors. Thermoreceptors perceive sensations related to the temperature of objects. There are two basic categories of thermoreceptors: hot receptors and cold receptors. The highest concentration of thermoreceptors can be found in the face and ears. Pain receptors, or nociceptor detect pain or stimuli that can or does cause damage to the skin and other tissues of the body. There are over three million pain receptors throughout the body, found in skin, muscles, bones, blood vessels, and some organs. Proprioceptors detect the position of different parts of the body in relation to each other and the surrounding environment. These receptors are found in joints, tendons and muscles, and allow us to do fundamental things such as feeding or clothing ourselves. 	there are millions of touch receptors scattered throughout the body	true
DNA is located in the nucleus. Proteins are made on ribosomes in the cytoplasm. Remember that information in a gene is converted into mRNA, which carries the information to the ribosome. In the nucleus, mRNA is created by using the DNA in a gene as a template. A template is a model provided for others to copy. The process of constructing an mRNA molecule from DNA is known as transcription ( Figure 1.1 and Figure of double stranded DNA. In transcription, only one strand of DNA is used as a template. First, the double helix of DNA unwinds and an enzyme, RNA Polymerase, builds the mRNA using the DNA as a template. The nucleotides follow basically the same base pairing rules as in DNA to form the correct sequence in the mRNA. This time, however, uracil (U) pairs with each adenine (A) in the DNA. For example, a DNA sequence ACGGGTAAGG will be transcribed into the mRNA sequence UGCCCAUUCC. In this manner, the information of the DNA is passed on to the mRNA. The mRNA will carry this code to the ribosomes to tell them how to make a protein. As not all genes are used in every cell, a gene must be "turned on" or expressed when the gene product is needed by the cell. Only the information in a gene that is being expressed is transcribed into an mRNA. Transcription is when RNA is created from a DNA template. Each gene (a) contains triplets of bases (b) that are transcribed into RNA (c). Every triplet in the DNA, or codon in the mRNA, encodes for a unique amino acid. Base-pairing ensures the accuracy of transcription. Notice how the helix must unwind for transcription to take place. The new mRNA is shown in green. 	transcription occurs in a ribosome in the nucleus	false
DNA is located in the nucleus. Proteins are made on ribosomes in the cytoplasm. Remember that information in a gene is converted into mRNA, which carries the information to the ribosome. In the nucleus, mRNA is created by using the DNA in a gene as a template. A template is a model provided for others to copy. The process of constructing an mRNA molecule from DNA is known as transcription ( Figure 1.1 and Figure of double stranded DNA. In transcription, only one strand of DNA is used as a template. First, the double helix of DNA unwinds and an enzyme, RNA Polymerase, builds the mRNA using the DNA as a template. The nucleotides follow basically the same base pairing rules as in DNA to form the correct sequence in the mRNA. This time, however, uracil (U) pairs with each adenine (A) in the DNA. For example, a DNA sequence ACGGGTAAGG will be transcribed into the mRNA sequence UGCCCAUUCC. In this manner, the information of the DNA is passed on to the mRNA. The mRNA will carry this code to the ribosomes to tell them how to make a protein. As not all genes are used in every cell, a gene must be "turned on" or expressed when the gene product is needed by the cell. Only the information in a gene that is being expressed is transcribed into an mRNA. Transcription is when RNA is created from a DNA template. Each gene (a) contains triplets of bases (b) that are transcribed into RNA (c). Every triplet in the DNA, or codon in the mRNA, encodes for a unique amino acid. Base-pairing ensures the accuracy of transcription. Notice how the helix must unwind for transcription to take place. The new mRNA is shown in green. 	all genes in a cell are transcribed into mrna	false
The mRNA, which is transcribed from the DNA in the nucleus, carries the directions for the protein-making process. mRNA tells the ribosome ( Figure 1.1) how to create a specific protein. Ribosomes translate RNA into a protein with a specific amino acid sequence. The tRNA binds and brings to the ribosome the amino acid encoded by the mRNA. The process of reading the mRNA code in the ribosome to make a protein is called translation ( Figure 1.2): the mRNA is translated from the language of nucleic acids (nucleotides) to the language of proteins (amino acids). Sets of three bases, called codons, are read in the ribosome, the organelle responsible for making proteins. This summary of how genes are ex- pressed shows that DNA is transcribed into RNA, which is translated, in turn, to protein. The one letter code represents amino acids. The following are the steps involved in translation: mRNA travels to the ribosome from the nucleus. The following steps occur in the ribosome: The base code in the mRNA determines the order of the amino acids in the protein. The genetic code in mRNA is read in words of three letters (triplets), called codons. Each codon codes for an amino acid. There are 20 amino acids used to make proteins, and different codons code for different amino acids. For example, GGU codes for the amino acid glycine, while GUC codes for valine. tRNA reads the mRNA code and brings a specific amino acid to attach to the growing chain of amino acids. The anticodon on the tRNA binds to the codon on the mRNA. Each tRNA carries only one type of amino acid and only recognizes one specific codon. For example, a GGC anticodon will bind to a CCG codon, and a CGA anticodon will bind to a GCU codon. tRNA is released from the amino acid. Three codons, UGA, UAA, and UAG, indicate that the protein should stop adding amino acids. They are called stop codons and do not code for an amino acid. Once tRNA comes to a stop codon, the protein is set free from the ribosome. The following chart ( Figure 1.3) is used to determine which amino acids correspond to which codons. 	ribosomes are the organelles where proteins are made	true
The mRNA, which is transcribed from the DNA in the nucleus, carries the directions for the protein-making process. mRNA tells the ribosome ( Figure 1.1) how to create a specific protein. Ribosomes translate RNA into a protein with a specific amino acid sequence. The tRNA binds and brings to the ribosome the amino acid encoded by the mRNA. The process of reading the mRNA code in the ribosome to make a protein is called translation ( Figure 1.2): the mRNA is translated from the language of nucleic acids (nucleotides) to the language of proteins (amino acids). Sets of three bases, called codons, are read in the ribosome, the organelle responsible for making proteins. This summary of how genes are ex- pressed shows that DNA is transcribed into RNA, which is translated, in turn, to protein. The one letter code represents amino acids. The following are the steps involved in translation: mRNA travels to the ribosome from the nucleus. The following steps occur in the ribosome: The base code in the mRNA determines the order of the amino acids in the protein. The genetic code in mRNA is read in words of three letters (triplets), called codons. Each codon codes for an amino acid. There are 20 amino acids used to make proteins, and different codons code for different amino acids. For example, GGU codes for the amino acid glycine, while GUC codes for valine. tRNA reads the mRNA code and brings a specific amino acid to attach to the growing chain of amino acids. The anticodon on the tRNA binds to the codon on the mRNA. Each tRNA carries only one type of amino acid and only recognizes one specific codon. For example, a GGC anticodon will bind to a CCG codon, and a CGA anticodon will bind to a GCU codon. tRNA is released from the amino acid. Three codons, UGA, UAA, and UAG, indicate that the protein should stop adding amino acids. They are called stop codons and do not code for an amino acid. Once tRNA comes to a stop codon, the protein is set free from the ribosome. The following chart ( Figure 1.3) is used to determine which amino acids correspond to which codons. 	translation translates from one language to another	true
Echinoderms are spread all over the world at almost all depths, latitudes, and environments in the ocean. Most feather stars (crinoids) live in shallow water. In the deep ocean, sea cucumbers are common, sometimes making up 90% of the organisms. Most echinoderms, however, are found in reefs just lying beneath the surface of the water. No echinoderms are found in freshwater habitats or on land. This makes Echinodermata the largest animal phylum to only have ocean-based species. 	not all echinoderms have the ability to move around	true
Echinoderms are spread all over the world at almost all depths, latitudes, and environments in the ocean. Most feather stars (crinoids) live in shallow water. In the deep ocean, sea cucumbers are common, sometimes making up 90% of the organisms. Most echinoderms, however, are found in reefs just lying beneath the surface of the water. No echinoderms are found in freshwater habitats or on land. This makes Echinodermata the largest animal phylum to only have ocean-based species. 	sand dollars can be found both in the ocean and on land	false
Carbohydrates are nutrients that include sugars, starches, and fiber. There are two types of carbohydrates: simple and complex. Pictured below are some foods that are good sources of carbohydrates ( Figure 1.1). 	vegetable oil olive oil and nuts are good sources of carbohydrates	false
Carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids contain energy. When your body digests food, it breaks down the molecules of these nutrients. This releases the energy so your body can use it. 	unsaturated lipids are needed in small amounts for good health	true
Sometimes, the urinary system ( Figure 1.1) is called the excretory system. But the urinary system is only one part of the excretory system. Recall that the excretory system is also made up of the skin, lungs, and large intestine, as well as the kidneys. The urinary system is the organ system that makes, stores, and gets rid of urine. 	the urinary system is the same as the excretory system	false
Sometimes, the urinary system ( Figure 1.1) is called the excretory system. But the urinary system is only one part of the excretory system. Recall that the excretory system is also made up of the skin, lungs, and large intestine, as well as the kidneys. The urinary system is the organ system that makes, stores, and gets rid of urine. 	urine is mostly water	true
You probably know people who need eyeglasses or contact lenses to see clearly. Maybe you need them yourself. Lenses are used to correct vision problems. Two of the most common vision problems are myopia and hyperopia. 	about 1 of every 2 people need some sort of vision correction	true
You probably know people who need eyeglasses or contact lenses to see clearly. Maybe you need them yourself. Lenses are used to correct vision problems. Two of the most common vision problems are myopia and hyperopia. 	signs of myopia usually begin in childhood	true
Vitamins and minerals are also nutrients. They do not provide energy, but they are needed for good health. 	minerals are organic compounds	false
Vitamins and minerals are also nutrients. They do not provide energy, but they are needed for good health. 	vitamins are a good source of energy	false
Bases change the color of certain compounds, and this property can be used to detect them. A common indicator of bases is red litmus paper. Bases turn red litmus paper blue. You can see an example in Figure 10.8. Red cabbage juice can detect bases as well as acids, as youll see by reviewing this video:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	acids turn blue litmus paper red	true
A base is an ionic compound that produces negative hydroxide ions (OH ) when dissolved in water. For example, when the compound sodium hydroxide (NaOH) dissolves in water, it produces hydroxide ions and positive sodium ions (Na+ ). This can be represented by the equation: NaOH H2 O ! OH + Na+ 	sodium chloride is an example of a base	false
All bases share certain properties, including a bitter taste. (Never taste an unknown substance to see whether it is a base!) Did you ever taste unsweetened cocoa powder? It tastes bitter because it is a base. Bases also feel slippery. Think about how slippery soap feels. Soap is also a base. Like acids, bases conduct electricity because they consist of charged particles in solution. 	bases cannot conduct electricity	false
Acids have many important uses, especially in industry. For example, sulfuric acid is used to manufacture a variety of different products, including paper, paint, and detergent. Some other uses of acids are illustrated in Figure 10.7. 	all acids are harmful	false
The strength of an acid depends on the concentration of hydrogen ions it produces when dissolved in water. A stronger acid produces a greater concentration of ions than a weaker acid. For example, when hydrogen chloride is added to water, all of it breaks down into H+ and Cl ions. Therefore, it is a strong acid. On the other hand, only about 1 percent of acetic acid breaks down into ions, so it is a weak acid. The strength of a base depends on the concentration of hydroxide ions it produces when dissolved in water. For example, sodium hydroxide completely breaks down into ions in water, so it is a strong base. However, only a fraction of ammonia breaks down into ions, so it is a weak base. 	a strong acid has a high concentration of hydrogen ions	true
The strength of acids and bases is measured on a scale called the pH scale (see Figure 10.10). The symbol pH represents acidity, or the concentration of hydrogen ions (H+ ) in a solution. Pure water, which is neutral, has a pH of 7. With a higher concentration of hydrogen ions, a solution is more acidic but has a lower pH. Therefore, acids have a pH less than 7, and the strongest acids have a pH close to zero. Bases have a pH greater than 7, and the strongest bases have a pH close to 14. You can watch a video about the pH scale at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the symbol ph represents acidity	true
The strength of an acid depends on the concentration of hydrogen ions it produces when dissolved in water. A stronger acid produces a greater concentration of ions than a weaker acid. For example, when hydrogen chloride is added to water, all of it breaks down into H+ and Cl ions. Therefore, it is a strong acid. On the other hand, only about 1 percent of acetic acid breaks down into ions, so it is a weak acid. The strength of a base depends on the concentration of hydroxide ions it produces when dissolved in water. For example, sodium hydroxide completely breaks down into ions in water, so it is a strong base. However, only a fraction of ammonia breaks down into ions, so it is a weak base. 	ammonia is a stronger base than is bleach	false
Acids have many important uses, especially in industry. For example, sulfuric acid is used to manufacture a variety of different products, including paper, paint, and detergent. Some other uses of acids are illustrated in Figure 10.7. 	acids are used to make fertilizer	true
Acids have many important uses, especially in industry. For example, sulfuric acid is used to manufacture a variety of different products, including paper, paint, and detergent. Some other uses of acids are illustrated in Figure 10.7. 	acid rain promotes rapid growth of plants	false
Acidity is an important factor for living things. For example, many plants grow best in soil that has a pH between 6 and 7. Fish also need a pH close to 7. Some air pollutants form acids when dissolved in water droplets in the air. This results in acid fog and acid rain, which may have a pH of 4 or even lower (see Figure 10.10). Figure 10.11 shows the effects of acid fog and acid rain on a forest. Acid rain also lowers the pH of surface waters such as streams and lakes. As a result, the water became too acidic for fish and many other water organisms to survive. Even normal (not acid) rain is slightly acidic. Thats because carbon dioxide in the air dissolves in raindrops, producing a weak acid called carbonic acid. When acidic rainwater soaks into the ground, it can slowly dissolve rocks, particularly those containing calcium carbonate. This is how water forms caves, like the one that opened this chapter. 	normal clean rainwater has a ph of 7	false
Bases change the color of certain compounds, and this property can be used to detect them. A common indicator of bases is red litmus paper. Bases turn red litmus paper blue. You can see an example in Figure 10.8. Red cabbage juice can detect bases as well as acids, as youll see by reviewing this video:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	litmus is the only indicator for detecting acids and bases	false
You already know that a sour taste is one property of acids. (Never taste an unknown substance to see whether it is an acid!) Acids have certain other properties as well. For example, acids can conduct electricity because they consist of charged particles in solution. Acids also react with metals to produce hydrogen gas. For example, when hydrochloric acid (HCl) reacts with the metal magnesium (Mg), it produces magnesium chloride (MgCl2 ) and hydrogen (H2 ). This is a single replacement reaction, represented by the chemical equation: Mg + 2HCl ! H2 + MgCl2 You can see an online demonstration of a similar reaction at this URL: 	type of chemical reaction in which an acid reacts with a base	1.g
Acids have many important uses, especially in industry. For example, sulfuric acid is used to manufacture a variety of different products, including paper, paint, and detergent. Some other uses of acids are illustrated in Figure 10.7. 	acids have many important uses in industry	true
A base is an ionic compound that produces negative hydroxide ions (OH ) when dissolved in water. For example, when the compound sodium hydroxide (NaOH) dissolves in water, it produces hydroxide ions and positive sodium ions (Na+ ). This can be represented by the equation: NaOH H2 O ! OH + Na+ 	ionic compound that produces hydroxide ions when dissolved in water	2.c
A base is an ionic compound that produces negative hydroxide ions (OH ) when dissolved in water. For example, when the compound sodium hydroxide (NaOH) dissolves in water, it produces hydroxide ions and positive sodium ions (Na+ ). This can be represented by the equation: NaOH H2 O ! OH + Na+ 	ionic compound formed when an acid and a base react	3.e
A base is an ionic compound that produces negative hydroxide ions (OH ) when dissolved in water. For example, when the compound sodium hydroxide (NaOH) dissolves in water, it produces hydroxide ions and positive sodium ions (Na+ ). This can be represented by the equation: NaOH H2 O ! OH + Na+ 	when sodium hydroxide dissolves in water it forms hydrogen ions	false
The strength of acids and bases is measured on a scale called the pH scale (see Figure 10.10). The symbol pH represents acidity, or the concentration of hydrogen ions (H+ ) in a solution. Pure water, which is neutral, has a pH of 7. With a higher concentration of hydrogen ions, a solution is more acidic but has a lower pH. Therefore, acids have a pH less than 7, and the strongest acids have a pH close to zero. Bases have a pH greater than 7, and the strongest bases have a pH close to 14. You can watch a video about the pH scale at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	concentration of hydrogen ions in a solution	4.b
The strength of acids and bases is measured on a scale called the pH scale (see Figure 10.10). The symbol pH represents acidity, or the concentration of hydrogen ions (H+ ) in a solution. Pure water, which is neutral, has a pH of 7. With a higher concentration of hydrogen ions, a solution is more acidic but has a lower pH. Therefore, acids have a pH less than 7, and the strongest acids have a pH close to zero. Bases have a pH greater than 7, and the strongest bases have a pH close to 14. You can watch a video about the pH scale at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	a neutral substance has a ph of 7	true
As you read above, an acid produces positive hydrogen ions and a base produces negative hydroxide ions. If an acid and base react together, the hydrogen and hydroxide ions combine to form water. This is represented by the equation: H+ + OH ! H2 O An acid also produces negative ions, and a base also produces positive ions. For example, the acid hydrogen chloride (HCl), when dissolved in water, produces negative chloride ions (Cl ) as well as hydrogen ions. The base sodium hydroxide (NaOH) produces positive sodium ions (Na+ ) in addition to hydroxide ions. These other ions also combine when the acid and base react. They form sodium chloride (NaCl). This is represented by the equation: Na+ + Cl ! NaCl Sodium chloride is called table salt, but salt is a more general term. A salt is any ionic compound that forms when an acid and base react. It consists of a positive ion from the base and a negative ion from the acid. Like pure water, a salt is neutral in pH. Thats why reactions of acids and bases are called neutralization reactions. Another example of a neutralization reaction is described in Figure 10.12. You can learn more about salts and how they form at this URL:  (13:21). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	a salt forms when an acid and base react	true
A base is an ionic compound that produces negative hydroxide ions (OH ) when dissolved in water. For example, when the compound sodium hydroxide (NaOH) dissolves in water, it produces hydroxide ions and positive sodium ions (Na+ ). This can be represented by the equation: NaOH H2 O ! OH + Na+ 	ionic compound that produces hydrogen ions when dissolved in water	5.a
The strength of acids and bases is measured on a scale called the pH scale (see Figure 10.10). The symbol pH represents acidity, or the concentration of hydrogen ions (H+ ) in a solution. Pure water, which is neutral, has a pH of 7. With a higher concentration of hydrogen ions, a solution is more acidic but has a lower pH. Therefore, acids have a pH less than 7, and the strongest acids have a pH close to zero. Bases have a pH greater than 7, and the strongest bases have a pH close to 14. You can watch a video about the pH scale at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	measure of the acidity of a solution	6.d
Bases change the color of certain compounds, and this property can be used to detect them. A common indicator of bases is red litmus paper. Bases turn red litmus paper blue. You can see an example in Figure 10.8. Red cabbage juice can detect bases as well as acids, as youll see by reviewing this video:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	compound used to detect acids and bases	7.f
Radioactivity is the ability of an atom to emit, or give off, charged particles and energy from the nucleus. The charged particles and energy are called by the general term radiation. Only unstable nuclei emit radiation. When they do, they gain or lose protons. Then the atoms become different elements. (Be careful not to confuse this radiation with electromagnetic radiation, which has to do with the light given off by atoms as they absorb and then emit energy.) 	some elements naturally change into different elements	true
Radioactivity is the ability of an atom to emit, or give off, charged particles and energy from the nucleus. The charged particles and energy are called by the general term radiation. Only unstable nuclei emit radiation. When they do, they gain or lose protons. Then the atoms become different elements. (Be careful not to confuse this radiation with electromagnetic radiation, which has to do with the light given off by atoms as they absorb and then emit energy.) 	only unstable nuclei emit radiation	true
Isotopes are atoms of the same element that differ from each other because they have different numbers of neutrons. Many elements have one or more isotopes that are radioactive. Radioactive isotopes are called radioisotopes. An example of a radioisotope is carbon-14. All carbon atoms have 6 protons, and most have 6 neutrons. These carbon atoms are called carbon-12, where 12 is the mass number (6 protons + 6 neutrons). A tiny percentage of carbon atoms have 8 neutrons instead of the usual 6. These atoms are called carbon-14 (6 protons + 8 neutrons). The nuclei of carbon-14 are unstable because they have too many neutrons. To be stable, a small nucleus like carbon, with just 6 protons, must have a 1:1 ratio of protons to neutrons. In other words, it must have the same number of neutrons as protons. In a large nucleus, with many protons, the ratio must be 2:1 or even 3:1 protons to neutrons. In elements with more than 83 protons, all the isotopes are radioactive (see Figure 11.2). The force of repulsion among all those protons overcomes the strong force holding them together. This makes the nuclei unstable and radioactive. Elements with more than 92 protons have such unstable nuclei that these elements do not even exist in nature. They exist only if they are created in a lab. 	the radioactive isotope of carbon has fewer neutrons than other isotopes of carbon	false
A low level of radiation occurs naturally in the environment. This is called background radiation. It comes from various sources. One source is rocks, which may contain small amounts of radioactive elements such as uranium. Another source is cosmic rays. These are charged particles that arrive on Earth from outer space. Background radiation is generally considered to be safe for living things. A source of radiation that may be more dangerous is radon. Radon is a radioactive gas that forms in rocks underground. It can seep into basements and get trapped inside buildings. Then it may build up and become harmful to people who breathe it. Other sources of radiation are described in the interactive animation at this URL: http://w 	radon gas is harmful when it burns and causes pollution	false
A low level of radiation occurs naturally in the environment. This is called background radiation. It comes from various sources. One source is rocks, which may contain small amounts of radioactive elements such as uranium. Another source is cosmic rays. These are charged particles that arrive on Earth from outer space. Background radiation is generally considered to be safe for living things. A source of radiation that may be more dangerous is radon. Radon is a radioactive gas that forms in rocks underground. It can seep into basements and get trapped inside buildings. Then it may build up and become harmful to people who breathe it. Other sources of radiation are described in the interactive animation at this URL: http://w 	background radiation is generally considered to be safe for living things	true
One reason radiation is dangerous is that it cant be detected with the senses. You normally cant see it, smell it, hear it, or feel it. Fortunately, there are devices such as Geiger counters that can detect radiation. A Geiger counter, like the one in Figure 11.4, has a tube that contains atoms of a gas. If radiation enters the tube, it turns gas atoms to ions that carry electric current. The current causes the Geiger counter to click. The faster the clicks occur, the higher the level of radiation. You can see a video about the Geiger counter and how it was invented at the URL below. 	there is no way to detect radiation	false
You may have seen a sign like the one in Figure 11.3. It warns people that there is radiation in the area. Exposure to radiation can be very dangerous. Radiation damages living things by knocking electrons out of atoms and changing them to ions. Radiation also breaks bonds in DNA and other biochemical compounds. A single large exposure to radiation can burn the skin and cause radiation sickness. Symptoms of this illness include extreme fatigue, destruction of blood cells, and loss of hair. Long-term exposure to lower levels of radiation can cause cancer. For example, radon in buildings can cause lung cancer. Marie Curie died of cancer, most likely because of exposure to radiation in her research. To learn more about the harmful health effects of radiation, go to this URL:  . Nonliving things can also be damaged by radiation. For example, high levels of radiation can remove electrons from metals. This may weaken metals in nuclear power plants and space vehicles, both of which are exposed to very high levels of radiation. 	radiation can break bonds in biochemical molecules	true
Despite its dangers, radioactivity has several uses. It can be used to determine the ages of ancient rocks and fossils. This use of radioactivity is explained in this chapters "Radioactive Decay" lesson. Radioactivity can also be used as a source of power to generate electricity. This use of radioactivity is covered later on in this chapter in the lesson "Nuclear Energy." Radioactivity can even be used to diagnose and treat diseases, including cancer. Cancer cells grow rapidly and take up a lot of glucose for energy. Glucose containing radioactive elements can be given to patients. Cancer cells will take up more of the glucose than normal cells do and give off radiation. The radiation can be detected with special machines (see Figure 11.5). Radioactive elements taken up by cancer cells may also be used to kill the cells and treat the disease. You can learn more about medical uses of radiation at the URL below. MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	radioactive isotopes can be used to determine the ages of fossils	true
You may have seen a sign like the one in Figure 11.3. It warns people that there is radiation in the area. Exposure to radiation can be very dangerous. Radiation damages living things by knocking electrons out of atoms and changing them to ions. Radiation also breaks bonds in DNA and other biochemical compounds. A single large exposure to radiation can burn the skin and cause radiation sickness. Symptoms of this illness include extreme fatigue, destruction of blood cells, and loss of hair. Long-term exposure to lower levels of radiation can cause cancer. For example, radon in buildings can cause lung cancer. Marie Curie died of cancer, most likely because of exposure to radiation in her research. To learn more about the harmful health effects of radiation, go to this URL:  . Nonliving things can also be damaged by radiation. For example, high levels of radiation can remove electrons from metals. This may weaken metals in nuclear power plants and space vehicles, both of which are exposed to very high levels of radiation. 	radiation is harmless to nonliving things such as metals	false
Radioactivity is the ability of an atom to emit, or give off, charged particles and energy from the nucleus. The charged particles and energy are called by the general term radiation. Only unstable nuclei emit radiation. When they do, they gain or lose protons. Then the atoms become different elements. (Be careful not to confuse this radiation with electromagnetic radiation, which has to do with the light given off by atoms as they absorb and then emit energy.) 	you cannot see radiation but you can always feel it	false
You may have seen a sign like the one in Figure 11.3. It warns people that there is radiation in the area. Exposure to radiation can be very dangerous. Radiation damages living things by knocking electrons out of atoms and changing them to ions. Radiation also breaks bonds in DNA and other biochemical compounds. A single large exposure to radiation can burn the skin and cause radiation sickness. Symptoms of this illness include extreme fatigue, destruction of blood cells, and loss of hair. Long-term exposure to lower levels of radiation can cause cancer. For example, radon in buildings can cause lung cancer. Marie Curie died of cancer, most likely because of exposure to radiation in her research. To learn more about the harmful health effects of radiation, go to this URL:  . Nonliving things can also be damaged by radiation. For example, high levels of radiation can remove electrons from metals. This may weaken metals in nuclear power plants and space vehicles, both of which are exposed to very high levels of radiation. 	a single large exposure to radiation can burn the skin	true
Radioactivity is the ability of an atom to emit, or give off, charged particles and energy from the nucleus. The charged particles and energy are called by the general term radiation. Only unstable nuclei emit radiation. When they do, they gain or lose protons. Then the atoms become different elements. (Be careful not to confuse this radiation with electromagnetic radiation, which has to do with the light given off by atoms as they absorb and then emit energy.) 	human activities are responsible for almost all the radiation in the environment	false
Despite its dangers, radioactivity has several uses. It can be used to determine the ages of ancient rocks and fossils. This use of radioactivity is explained in this chapters "Radioactive Decay" lesson. Radioactivity can also be used as a source of power to generate electricity. This use of radioactivity is covered later on in this chapter in the lesson "Nuclear Energy." Radioactivity can even be used to diagnose and treat diseases, including cancer. Cancer cells grow rapidly and take up a lot of glucose for energy. Glucose containing radioactive elements can be given to patients. Cancer cells will take up more of the glucose than normal cells do and give off radiation. The radiation can be detected with special machines (see Figure 11.5). Radioactive elements taken up by cancer cells may also be used to kill the cells and treat the disease. You can learn more about medical uses of radiation at the URL below. MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	radiation can be used to generate electricity	true
You may have seen a sign like the one in Figure 11.3. It warns people that there is radiation in the area. Exposure to radiation can be very dangerous. Radiation damages living things by knocking electrons out of atoms and changing them to ions. Radiation also breaks bonds in DNA and other biochemical compounds. A single large exposure to radiation can burn the skin and cause radiation sickness. Symptoms of this illness include extreme fatigue, destruction of blood cells, and loss of hair. Long-term exposure to lower levels of radiation can cause cancer. For example, radon in buildings can cause lung cancer. Marie Curie died of cancer, most likely because of exposure to radiation in her research. To learn more about the harmful health effects of radiation, go to this URL:  . Nonliving things can also be damaged by radiation. For example, high levels of radiation can remove electrons from metals. This may weaken metals in nuclear power plants and space vehicles, both of which are exposed to very high levels of radiation. 	any exposure to radiation causes burns and destroys blood cells	false
One reason radiation is dangerous is that it cant be detected with the senses. You normally cant see it, smell it, hear it, or feel it. Fortunately, there are devices such as Geiger counters that can detect radiation. A Geiger counter, like the one in Figure 11.4, has a tube that contains atoms of a gas. If radiation enters the tube, it turns gas atoms to ions that carry electric current. The current causes the Geiger counter to click. The faster the clicks occur, the higher the level of radiation. You can see a video about the Geiger counter and how it was invented at the URL below. 	a geiger counter works because radiation changes atoms of a gas to ions	true
A low level of radiation occurs naturally in the environment. This is called background radiation. It comes from various sources. One source is rocks, which may contain small amounts of radioactive elements such as uranium. Another source is cosmic rays. These are charged particles that arrive on Earth from outer space. Background radiation is generally considered to be safe for living things. A source of radiation that may be more dangerous is radon. Radon is a radioactive gas that forms in rocks underground. It can seep into basements and get trapped inside buildings. Then it may build up and become harmful to people who breathe it. Other sources of radiation are described in the interactive animation at this URL: http://w 	radioactive gas that forms in rocks underground	1.d
Radioactivity is the ability of an atom to emit, or give off, charged particles and energy from the nucleus. The charged particles and energy are called by the general term radiation. Only unstable nuclei emit radiation. When they do, they gain or lose protons. Then the atoms become different elements. (Be careful not to confuse this radiation with electromagnetic radiation, which has to do with the light given off by atoms as they absorb and then emit energy.) 	scientist who discovered radioactivity	2.f
Radioactivity is the ability of an atom to emit, or give off, charged particles and energy from the nucleus. The charged particles and energy are called by the general term radiation. Only unstable nuclei emit radiation. When they do, they gain or lose protons. Then the atoms become different elements. (Be careful not to confuse this radiation with electromagnetic radiation, which has to do with the light given off by atoms as they absorb and then emit energy.) 	ability of an atomic nucleus to give off charged particles and energy	3.c
A low level of radiation occurs naturally in the environment. This is called background radiation. It comes from various sources. One source is rocks, which may contain small amounts of radioactive elements such as uranium. Another source is cosmic rays. These are charged particles that arrive on Earth from outer space. Background radiation is generally considered to be safe for living things. A source of radiation that may be more dangerous is radon. Radon is a radioactive gas that forms in rocks underground. It can seep into basements and get trapped inside buildings. Then it may build up and become harmful to people who breathe it. Other sources of radiation are described in the interactive animation at this URL: http://w 	low level of radiation that occurs naturally in the environment	4.b
Radioactivity is the ability of an atom to emit, or give off, charged particles and energy from the nucleus. The charged particles and energy are called by the general term radiation. Only unstable nuclei emit radiation. When they do, they gain or lose protons. Then the atoms become different elements. (Be careful not to confuse this radiation with electromagnetic radiation, which has to do with the light given off by atoms as they absorb and then emit energy.) 	charged particles and energy emitted by an unstable nucleus	5.a
Radioactivity was discovered in 1896 by a French physicist named Antoine Henri Becquerel. Becquerel was experimenting with uranium, which glows after being exposed to sunlight. Becquerel wanted to see if the glow was caused by rays of energy, like rays of light and X-rays. He placed a bit of uranium on a photographic plate. The plate was similar to film thats used today to take X-rays. You can see an example of an X-ray in Figure 11.1. As Becquerel predicted, the uranium left an image on the photographic plate. This meant that uranium gives off rays after being exposed to sunlight. Becquerel was a good scientist, so he wanted to repeat his experiment to confirm his results. He placed more uranium on another photographic plate. However, the day had turned cloudy, so he tucked the plate and uranium in a drawer to try again another day. He wasnt expecting the uranium to leave an image on the plate without being exposed to sunlight. To his surprise, there was an image on the plate in the drawer the next day. Becquerel had discovered that uranium gives off rays without getting energy from light. He had discovered radioactivity, for which he received a Nobel prize. To learn more about the importance of Becquerels research, go to this URL: http://nobelprize.org/no Another scientist, who worked with Becquerel, actually came up with the term "radioactivity." The other scientist was the French chemist Marie Curie. She went on to discover the radioactive elements polonium and radium. She won two Nobel Prizes for her discoveries. You can learn more about Marie Curie at this URL: http://nobelprize.or 	scientist who discovered polonium and radium	6.g
Radioactivity is the ability of an atom to emit, or give off, charged particles and energy from the nucleus. The charged particles and energy are called by the general term radiation. Only unstable nuclei emit radiation. When they do, they gain or lose protons. Then the atoms become different elements. (Be careful not to confuse this radiation with electromagnetic radiation, which has to do with the light given off by atoms as they absorb and then emit energy.) 	atom with an unstable nucleus that emits radiation	7.e
Alpha decay occurs when an unstable nucleus emits an alpha particle and energy. The diagram in Figure 11.6 represents alpha decay. An alpha particle contains two protons and two neutrons, giving it a charge of +2. A helium nucleus has two protons and two neutrons, so an alpha particle is represented in nuclear equations by the symbol 4 He. 2 The superscript 4 is the mass number (2 protons + 2 neutrons). The subscript 2 is the charge of the particle as well as the number of protons. An example of alpha decay is the decay of uranium-238 to thorium-234. In this reaction, uranium loses two protons and two neutrons to become the element thorium. The reaction can be represented by this equation: 238 92 U 4 !234 90 Th +2 He + Energy If you count the number of protons and neutrons on each side of this equation, youll see that the numbers are the same on both sides of the arrow. This means that the equation is balanced. The thorium-234 produced in this reaction is unstable, so it will undergo radioactive decay as well. The alpha particle (42 He) produced in the reaction can pick up two electrons to form the element helium. This is how most of Earths helium formed. Problem Solving ? 4 Problem: Fill in the missing subscript and superscript to balance this nuclear equation: 208 84 Po !? Pb +2 He + Energy Solution: The subscript is 82, and the superscript is 204. You Try It! ? 4 Problem: Fill in the missing subscript and superscript to balance this nuclear equation: 222 ? Ra !86 Rn+2 He+Energy 	an alpha particle has the same mass as a helium nucleus	true
Alpha decay occurs when an unstable nucleus emits an alpha particle and energy. The diagram in Figure 11.6 represents alpha decay. An alpha particle contains two protons and two neutrons, giving it a charge of +2. A helium nucleus has two protons and two neutrons, so an alpha particle is represented in nuclear equations by the symbol 4 He. 2 The superscript 4 is the mass number (2 protons + 2 neutrons). The subscript 2 is the charge of the particle as well as the number of protons. An example of alpha decay is the decay of uranium-238 to thorium-234. In this reaction, uranium loses two protons and two neutrons to become the element thorium. The reaction can be represented by this equation: 238 92 U 4 !234 90 Th +2 He + Energy If you count the number of protons and neutrons on each side of this equation, youll see that the numbers are the same on both sides of the arrow. This means that the equation is balanced. The thorium-234 produced in this reaction is unstable, so it will undergo radioactive decay as well. The alpha particle (42 He) produced in the reaction can pick up two electrons to form the element helium. This is how most of Earths helium formed. Problem Solving ? 4 Problem: Fill in the missing subscript and superscript to balance this nuclear equation: 208 84 Po !? Pb +2 He + Energy Solution: The subscript is 82, and the superscript is 204. You Try It! ? 4 Problem: Fill in the missing subscript and superscript to balance this nuclear equation: 222 ? Ra !86 Rn+2 He+Energy 	nuclear equations do not need to balance	false
Beta decay occurs when an unstable nucleus emits a beta particle and energy. A beta particle is an electron. It has a charge of -1. In nuclear equations, a beta particle is represented by the symbol 01 e. The subscript -1 represents the particles charge, and the superscript 0 shows that the particle has virtually no mass. Nuclei contain only protons and neutrons, so how can a nucleus emit an electron? A neutron first breaks down into a proton and an electron (see Figure 11.7). Then the electron is emitted from the nucleus, while the proton stays inside the nucleus. The proton increases the atomic number by one, thus changing one element into another. An example of beta decay is the decay of thorium-234 to protactinium-234. In this reaction, thorium loses a neutron and gains a proton to become protactinium. The reaction can be represented by this equation: 234 90 Th !234 91 Pa + 0 1 e + Energy The protactinium-234 produced in this reaction is radioactive and decays to another element. The electron produced in the reaction (plus another electron) can combine with an alpha particle to form helium. Problem Solving Problem: Fill in the missing subscript and superscript in this nuclear equation: 131 I 53 !?? Xe + 14 C ? !?7 N + Solution: The subscript is 54, and the superscript is 131. 0 e + Energy 1 You Try It! Problem: Fill in the missing subscript and superscript in this nuclear equation: 0 e + Energy 1 	a beta particle has virtually no mass	true
In alpha and beta decay, both particles and energy are emitted. In gamma decay, only energy is emitted. Gamma decay occurs when an unstable nucleus gives off gamma rays. Gamma rays, like rays of visible light and X-rays, are waves of energy that travel through space at the speed of light. Gamma rays have the greatest amount of energy of all such waves. By itself, gamma decay doesnt cause one element to change into another, but it is released in nuclear reactions that do. Some of the energy released in alpha and beta decay is in the form of gamma rays. You can learn more about gamma radiation at this URL:  (2:45). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	gamma rays are released only during gamma decay	false
The different types of radiation vary in how far they are able to travel and what they can penetrate (see Figure 11.8 and the URL below). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Alpha particles can travel only a few centimeters through air. They cannot pass through a sheet of paper or thin layer of clothing. They may burn the skin but cannot penetrate tissues beneath the skin. Beta particles can travel up to a meter through air. They can pass through paper and cloth but not through a sheet of aluminum. They can penetrate and damage tissues beneath the skin. Gamma rays can travel thousands of meters through air. They can pass through a sheet of aluminum as well as paper and cloth. They can be stopped only by several centimeters of lead or several meters of concrete. They can penetrate and damage organs deep inside the body. 	alpha particles can pass through a sheet of aluminum	false
Carbon-14 has a relatively short half-life (see Table 11.1). After about 50,000 years, too little carbon-14 is left in a fossil to be measured. Therefore, carbon-14 dating can only be used to date fossils that are less than 50,000 years old. Radioisotopes with a longer half-life, such as potassium-40, must be used to date older fossils and rocks. 	carbon14 has a halflife of 57 million years	false
There are three types of radioactive decay: alpha, beta, and gamma decay. In all three types, nuclei emit radiation, but the nature of that radiation differs from one type of decay to another. You can watch a video about the three types at this URL:  (17:02). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	all three types of radioactive decay emit energy	true
There are three types of radioactive decay: alpha, beta, and gamma decay. In all three types, nuclei emit radiation, but the nature of that radiation differs from one type of decay to another. You can watch a video about the three types at this URL:  (17:02). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	a beta particle has a charge of 1	false
In alpha and beta decay, both particles and energy are emitted. In gamma decay, only energy is emitted. Gamma decay occurs when an unstable nucleus gives off gamma rays. Gamma rays, like rays of visible light and X-rays, are waves of energy that travel through space at the speed of light. Gamma rays have the greatest amount of energy of all such waves. By itself, gamma decay doesnt cause one element to change into another, but it is released in nuclear reactions that do. Some of the energy released in alpha and beta decay is in the form of gamma rays. You can learn more about gamma radiation at this URL:  (2:45). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	during beta decay a proton is emitted by a nucleus	false
A radioactive isotope decays at a certain constant rate. The rate is measured in a unit called the half-life. This is the length of time it takes for half of a given amount of the isotope to decay. The concept of half-life is illustrated in Figure 11.9 for the beta decay of phosphorus-32 to sulfur-32. The half-life of this radioisotope is 14 days. After 14 days, half of the original amount of phosphorus-32 has decayed. After another 14 days, half of the remaining amount (or one-quarter of the original amount) has decayed, and so on. Different radioactive isotopes vary greatly in their rate of decay. As you can see from the examples in Table 11.1, the half-life of a radioisotope can be as short as a split second or as long as several billion years. You can simulate radioactive decay of radioisotopes with different half-lives at the URL below. Some radioisotopes decay much more quickly than others. Isotope Uranium-238 Potassium-40 Carbon-14 Hydrogen-3 Radon-222 Polonium-214 Half-life 4.47 billion years 1.28 billion years 5,730 years 12.3 years 3.82 days 0.00016 seconds Problem Solving Problem: If you had a gram of carbon-14, how many years would it take for radioactive decay to reduce it to one-quarter of a gram? Solution: One gram would decay to one-quarter of a gram in 2 half-lives years. 1 2 12 = 1 4 , or 2  5,730 years = 11,460 You Try It! Problem: What fraction of a given amount of hydrogen-3 would be left after 36.9 years of decay? 	all radioisotopes decay at the same constant rate	false
There are three types of radioactive decay: alpha, beta, and gamma decay. In all three types, nuclei emit radiation, but the nature of that radiation differs from one type of decay to another. You can watch a video about the three types at this URL:  (17:02). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	in all three types of radioactive decay nuclei emit energy	true
There are three types of radioactive decay: alpha, beta, and gamma decay. In all three types, nuclei emit radiation, but the nature of that radiation differs from one type of decay to another. You can watch a video about the three types at this URL:  (17:02). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	during gamma decay one element changes into another	false
Alpha decay occurs when an unstable nucleus emits an alpha particle and energy. The diagram in Figure 11.6 represents alpha decay. An alpha particle contains two protons and two neutrons, giving it a charge of +2. A helium nucleus has two protons and two neutrons, so an alpha particle is represented in nuclear equations by the symbol 4 He. 2 The superscript 4 is the mass number (2 protons + 2 neutrons). The subscript 2 is the charge of the particle as well as the number of protons. An example of alpha decay is the decay of uranium-238 to thorium-234. In this reaction, uranium loses two protons and two neutrons to become the element thorium. The reaction can be represented by this equation: 238 92 U 4 !234 90 Th +2 He + Energy If you count the number of protons and neutrons on each side of this equation, youll see that the numbers are the same on both sides of the arrow. This means that the equation is balanced. The thorium-234 produced in this reaction is unstable, so it will undergo radioactive decay as well. The alpha particle (42 He) produced in the reaction can pick up two electrons to form the element helium. This is how most of Earths helium formed. Problem Solving ? 4 Problem: Fill in the missing subscript and superscript to balance this nuclear equation: 208 84 Po !? Pb +2 He + Energy Solution: The subscript is 82, and the superscript is 204. You Try It! ? 4 Problem: Fill in the missing subscript and superscript to balance this nuclear equation: 222 ? Ra !86 Rn+2 He+Energy 	most of earths helium formed when alpha particles picked up electrons	true
Carbon-14 forms naturally in Earths atmosphere when cosmic rays strike atoms of nitrogen-14. Living things take in and use carbon-14, just as they do carbon-12. The carbon-14 in living things gradually decays to nitrogen-14. However, it is constantly replaced because living things keep taking in carbon-14. As a result, there is a fixed ratio of carbon-14 to carbon-12 in organisms as long as they are alive. This is illustrated in the top part of Figure 11.10. After organisms die, the carbon-14 they already contain continues to decay, but it is no longer replaced (see bottom part of Figure 11.10). Therefore, the carbon-14 in a dead organism constantly declines at a fixed rate equal to the half-life of carbon-14. Half of the remaining carbon-14 decays every 5,730 years. If you measure how much carbon- 14 is left in a fossil, you can determine how many half-lives (and how many years) have passed since the organism died. 	carbon14 forms when cosmic rays strike atoms of carbon12	false
Radioactive isotopes can be used to estimate the ages of fossils and rocks. The method is called radioactive dating. Carbon-14 dating is an example of radioactive dating. It is illustrated in the video at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	carbon14 dating can be used to estimate the age of any fossil	false
Radioactive isotopes can be used to estimate the ages of fossils and rocks. The method is called radioactive dating. Carbon-14 dating is an example of radioactive dating. It is illustrated in the video at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	method of aging fossils that uses radioisotopes	1.c
There are three types of radioactive decay: alpha, beta, and gamma decay. In all three types, nuclei emit radiation, but the nature of that radiation differs from one type of decay to another. You can watch a video about the three types at this URL:  (17:02). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	process in which unstable nuclei emit charged particles and energy	2.f
Radioactive isotopes can be used to estimate the ages of fossils and rocks. The method is called radioactive dating. Carbon-14 dating is an example of radioactive dating. It is illustrated in the video at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	process in which a radioactive nucleus emits only energy	3.e
There are three types of radioactive decay: alpha, beta, and gamma decay. In all three types, nuclei emit radiation, but the nature of that radiation differs from one type of decay to another. You can watch a video about the three types at this URL:  (17:02). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	form of energy emitted during radioactive decay	4.g
Alpha decay occurs when an unstable nucleus emits an alpha particle and energy. The diagram in Figure 11.6 represents alpha decay. An alpha particle contains two protons and two neutrons, giving it a charge of +2. A helium nucleus has two protons and two neutrons, so an alpha particle is represented in nuclear equations by the symbol 4 He. 2 The superscript 4 is the mass number (2 protons + 2 neutrons). The subscript 2 is the charge of the particle as well as the number of protons. An example of alpha decay is the decay of uranium-238 to thorium-234. In this reaction, uranium loses two protons and two neutrons to become the element thorium. The reaction can be represented by this equation: 238 92 U 4 !234 90 Th +2 He + Energy If you count the number of protons and neutrons on each side of this equation, youll see that the numbers are the same on both sides of the arrow. This means that the equation is balanced. The thorium-234 produced in this reaction is unstable, so it will undergo radioactive decay as well. The alpha particle (42 He) produced in the reaction can pick up two electrons to form the element helium. This is how most of Earths helium formed. Problem Solving ? 4 Problem: Fill in the missing subscript and superscript to balance this nuclear equation: 208 84 Po !? Pb +2 He + Energy Solution: The subscript is 82, and the superscript is 204. You Try It! ? 4 Problem: Fill in the missing subscript and superscript to balance this nuclear equation: 222 ? Ra !86 Rn+2 He+Energy 	particle consisting of two protons and two neutrons	5.b
Radioactive isotopes can be used to estimate the ages of fossils and rocks. The method is called radioactive dating. Carbon-14 dating is an example of radioactive dating. It is illustrated in the video at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	rate at which a radioactive isotope decays	6.a
In alpha and beta decay, both particles and energy are emitted. In gamma decay, only energy is emitted. Gamma decay occurs when an unstable nucleus gives off gamma rays. Gamma rays, like rays of visible light and X-rays, are waves of energy that travel through space at the speed of light. Gamma rays have the greatest amount of energy of all such waves. By itself, gamma decay doesnt cause one element to change into another, but it is released in nuclear reactions that do. Some of the energy released in alpha and beta decay is in the form of gamma rays. You can learn more about gamma radiation at this URL:  (2:45). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	electron emitted by an unstable nucleus	7.d
When the nucleus of a radioisotope undergoes fission or fusion, it loses a tiny amount of mass. What happens to the lost mass? It isnt really lost at all. It is converted to energy. How much energy? E = mc2 . The change in mass is tiny, but it results in a great deal of energy. What about the laws of conservation of mass and conservation of energy? Do they not apply to nuclear reactions? We dont need to throw out these laws. Instead, we just need to combine them. It is more correct to say that the sum of mass and energy is always conserved in a nuclear reaction. Mass may change to energy, but the amount of mass and energy combined remains the same. 	e  mc2 explains why a small amount of mass can produce a great deal of energy	true
The neutrons released in this nuclear fission reaction may be captured by other uranium nuclei and cause them to fission as well. This can start a nuclear chain reaction (see Figure 11.13). In a chain reaction, one fission reaction leads to others, which lead to others, and so on. A nuclear chain reaction is similar to a pile of wood burning. If you start one piece of wood burning, enough heat is produced by the burning wood to start the rest of the pile burning without any further help from you. You can see another example of a chain reaction at this URL: 	the letter c in the equation e  mc2 stands for chain reaction	false
When the nucleus of a radioisotope undergoes fission or fusion, it loses a tiny amount of mass. What happens to the lost mass? It isnt really lost at all. It is converted to energy. How much energy? E = mc2 . The change in mass is tiny, but it results in a great deal of energy. What about the laws of conservation of mass and conservation of energy? Do they not apply to nuclear reactions? We dont need to throw out these laws. Instead, we just need to combine them. It is more correct to say that the sum of mass and energy is always conserved in a nuclear reaction. Mass may change to energy, but the amount of mass and energy combined remains the same. 	the sum of mass and energy is conserved in nuclear reactions	true
Nuclear fusion is the opposite of nuclear fission. In fusion, two or more small nuclei combine to form a single, larger nucleus. An example is shown in Figure 11.15. In this example, two hydrogen nuclei fuse to form a helium nucleus. A neutron and a great deal of energy are also released. In fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does. 	nuclear fusion is the opposite of nuclear fission	true
Nuclear fusion is the opposite of nuclear fission. In fusion, two or more small nuclei combine to form a single, larger nucleus. An example is shown in Figure 11.15. In this example, two hydrogen nuclei fuse to form a helium nucleus. A neutron and a great deal of energy are also released. In fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does. 	nuclear fission happens only in nuclear power plants	false
If a nuclear chain reaction is uncontrolled, it produces a lot of energy all at once. This is what happens in an atomic bomb. If a nuclear chain reaction is controlled, it produces energy more slowly. This is what occurs in a nuclear power plant. The reaction may be controlled by inserting rods of material that do not undergo fission into the core of fissioning material (see Figure 11.14). The radiation from the controlled fission is used to heat water and turn it to steam. The steam is under pressure and causes a turbine to spin. The spinning turbine runs a generator, which produces electricity. 	an atom bomb explosion is an uncontrolled nuclear chain reaction	true
Nuclear fusion is the opposite of nuclear fission. In fusion, two or more small nuclei combine to form a single, larger nucleus. An example is shown in Figure 11.15. In this example, two hydrogen nuclei fuse to form a helium nucleus. A neutron and a great deal of energy are also released. In fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does. 	using nuclear fission for power contributes to global warming	false
Nuclear fusion is the opposite of nuclear fission. In fusion, two or more small nuclei combine to form a single, larger nucleus. An example is shown in Figure 11.15. In this example, two hydrogen nuclei fuse to form a helium nucleus. A neutron and a great deal of energy are also released. In fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does. 	nuclear fusion releases less energy than nuclear fission does	false
Nuclear fusion is the opposite of nuclear fission. In fusion, two or more small nuclei combine to form a single, larger nucleus. An example is shown in Figure 11.15. In this example, two hydrogen nuclei fuse to form a helium nucleus. A neutron and a great deal of energy are also released. In fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does. 	waste from nuclear fission is no longer harmful after a couple of years	false
Nuclear fusion of hydrogen to form helium occurs naturally in the sun and other stars. It takes place only at extremely high temperatures. Thats because a great deal of energy is needed to overcome the force of repulsion between positively charged nuclei. The suns energy comes from fusion in its core, where temperatures reach millions of Kelvin (see Figure 11.16). 	the suns energy comes from nuclear fusion in its core	true
Nuclear fusion is the opposite of nuclear fission. In fusion, two or more small nuclei combine to form a single, larger nucleus. An example is shown in Figure 11.15. In this example, two hydrogen nuclei fuse to form a helium nucleus. A neutron and a great deal of energy are also released. In fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does. 	in the us most electrical energy is produced in nuclear power plants	false
Nuclear fusion is the opposite of nuclear fission. In fusion, two or more small nuclei combine to form a single, larger nucleus. An example is shown in Figure 11.15. In this example, two hydrogen nuclei fuse to form a helium nucleus. A neutron and a great deal of energy are also released. In fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does. 	the fuel needed for nuclear fission is very plentiful	false
Nuclear fusion is the opposite of nuclear fission. In fusion, two or more small nuclei combine to form a single, larger nucleus. An example is shown in Figure 11.15. In this example, two hydrogen nuclei fuse to form a helium nucleus. A neutron and a great deal of energy are also released. In fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does. 	the use of nuclear fusion for energy involves dangerous isotopes	false
Nuclear fusion is the opposite of nuclear fission. In fusion, two or more small nuclei combine to form a single, larger nucleus. An example is shown in Figure 11.15. In this example, two hydrogen nuclei fuse to form a helium nucleus. A neutron and a great deal of energy are also released. In fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does. 	matter that undergoes nuclear fusion is in the plasma state	true
Nuclear fusion is the opposite of nuclear fission. In fusion, two or more small nuclei combine to form a single, larger nucleus. An example is shown in Figure 11.15. In this example, two hydrogen nuclei fuse to form a helium nucleus. A neutron and a great deal of energy are also released. In fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does. 	one product of a nuclear fusion reaction is a proton	false
The neutrons released in this nuclear fission reaction may be captured by other uranium nuclei and cause them to fission as well. This can start a nuclear chain reaction (see Figure 11.13). In a chain reaction, one fission reaction leads to others, which lead to others, and so on. A nuclear chain reaction is similar to a pile of wood burning. If you start one piece of wood burning, enough heat is produced by the burning wood to start the rest of the pile burning without any further help from you. You can see another example of a chain reaction at this URL: 	process in which one nuclear reaction leads to others	1.c
Nuclear fusion is the opposite of nuclear fission. In fusion, two or more small nuclei combine to form a single, larger nucleus. An example is shown in Figure 11.15. In this example, two hydrogen nuclei fuse to form a helium nucleus. A neutron and a great deal of energy are also released. In fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does. 	splitting of a nucleus into two smaller nuclei	2.d
The neutrons released in this nuclear fission reaction may be captured by other uranium nuclei and cause them to fission as well. This can start a nuclear chain reaction (see Figure 11.13). In a chain reaction, one fission reaction leads to others, which lead to others, and so on. A nuclear chain reaction is similar to a pile of wood burning. If you start one piece of wood burning, enough heat is produced by the burning wood to start the rest of the pile burning without any further help from you. You can see another example of a chain reaction at this URL: 	particle that starts a nuclear fission reaction	3.e
Nuclear fusion is the opposite of nuclear fission. In fusion, two or more small nuclei combine to form a single, larger nucleus. An example is shown in Figure 11.15. In this example, two hydrogen nuclei fuse to form a helium nucleus. A neutron and a great deal of energy are also released. In fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does. 	form of energy generated by a nuclear power plant	4.a
Nuclear fusion is the opposite of nuclear fission. In fusion, two or more small nuclei combine to form a single, larger nucleus. An example is shown in Figure 11.15. In this example, two hydrogen nuclei fuse to form a helium nucleus. A neutron and a great deal of energy are also released. In fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does. 	joining of two or more nuclei to form one larger nucleus	5.g
Nuclear fusion is the opposite of nuclear fission. In fusion, two or more small nuclei combine to form a single, larger nucleus. An example is shown in Figure 11.15. In this example, two hydrogen nuclei fuse to form a helium nucleus. A neutron and a great deal of energy are also released. In fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does. 	reaction such as nuclear fission or nuclear fusion	6.b
Nuclear fusion is the opposite of nuclear fission. In fusion, two or more small nuclei combine to form a single, larger nucleus. An example is shown in Figure 11.15. In this example, two hydrogen nuclei fuse to form a helium nucleus. A neutron and a great deal of energy are also released. In fact, fusion releases even more energy than fission does. 	form of energy released in a nuclear reaction	7.f
Assume that a school bus, like the one in Figure 12.2, passes by as you stand on the sidewalk. Its obvious to you that the bus is moving. It is moving relative to you and the trees across the street. But what about to the children inside the bus? They arent moving relative to each other. If they look only at the other children sitting near them, they will not appear to be moving. They may only be able to tell that the bus is moving by looking out the window and seeing you and the trees whizzing by. This example shows that how we perceive motion depends on our frame of reference. Frame of reference refers to something that is not moving with respect to an observer that can be used to detect motion. For the children on the bus, if they use other children riding the bus as their frame of reference, they do not appear to be moving. But if they use objects outside the bus as their frame of reference, they can tell they are moving. What is your frame of reference if you are standing on the sidewalk and see the bus go by? How can you tell the bus is moving? The video at the URL below illustrates other examples of how frame of reference is related to motion. MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	something that is not moving with respect to an observer that can be used to detect motion	1.b
Things dont always move in straight lines like the route from Mias house to the school. Sometimes they change direction as they move. For example, the route from Mias house to the post office changes from west to north at the school (see Figure 12.4). To find the total distance of a route that changes direction, you must add up the distances traveled in each direction. From Mias house to the school, for example, the distance is 2 kilometers. From the school to the post office, the distance is 1 kilometer. Therefore, the total distance from Mias house to the post office is 3 kilometers. You Try It! Problem: What is the distance from the post office to the park in Figure 12.4? Direction is just as important as distance in describing motion. For example, if Mia told a friend how to reach the post office from her house, she couldnt just say, "go 3 kilometers." The friend might end up at the park instead of the post office. Mia would have to be more specific. She could say, "go west for 2 kilometers and then go north for 1 kilometer." When both distance and direction are considered, motion is a vector. A vector is a quantity that includes both size and direction. A vector is represented by an arrow. The length of the arrow represents distance. The way the arrow points shows direction. The red arrows in Figure 12.4 are vectors for Mias route to the school and post office. If you want to learn more about vectors, watch the videos at these URLs:  (5:27) MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  You Try It! Problem: Draw vectors to represent the route from the post office to the park in Figure 12.4. 	quantity that includes both size and direction	2.d
Assume that a school bus, like the one in Figure 12.2, passes by as you stand on the sidewalk. Its obvious to you that the bus is moving. It is moving relative to you and the trees across the street. But what about to the children inside the bus? They arent moving relative to each other. If they look only at the other children sitting near them, they will not appear to be moving. They may only be able to tell that the bus is moving by looking out the window and seeing you and the trees whizzing by. This example shows that how we perceive motion depends on our frame of reference. Frame of reference refers to something that is not moving with respect to an observer that can be used to detect motion. For the children on the bus, if they use other children riding the bus as their frame of reference, they do not appear to be moving. But if they use objects outside the bus as their frame of reference, they can tell they are moving. What is your frame of reference if you are standing on the sidewalk and see the bus go by? How can you tell the bus is moving? The video at the URL below illustrates other examples of how frame of reference is related to motion. MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	location	3.g
Assume that a school bus, like the one in Figure 12.2, passes by as you stand on the sidewalk. Its obvious to you that the bus is moving. It is moving relative to you and the trees across the street. But what about to the children inside the bus? They arent moving relative to each other. If they look only at the other children sitting near them, they will not appear to be moving. They may only be able to tell that the bus is moving by looking out the window and seeing you and the trees whizzing by. This example shows that how we perceive motion depends on our frame of reference. Frame of reference refers to something that is not moving with respect to an observer that can be used to detect motion. For the children on the bus, if they use other children riding the bus as their frame of reference, they do not appear to be moving. But if they use objects outside the bus as their frame of reference, they can tell they are moving. What is your frame of reference if you are standing on the sidewalk and see the bus go by? How can you tell the bus is moving? The video at the URL below illustrates other examples of how frame of reference is related to motion. MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	change in position	4.c
The SI unit for distance is the meter (1 m = 3.28 ft). Short distances may be measured in centimeters (1 cm = 0.01 m). Long distances may be measured in kilometers (1 km = 1000 m). For example, you might measure the distance a frogs tongue moves in centimeters and the distance a cheetah moves in kilometers. 	line along which something moves	5.f
Did you ever go to a track meet like the one pictured in Figure 12.3? Running events in track include 100-meter sprints and 2000-meter races. Races are named for their distance. Distance is the length of the route between two points. The length of the route in a race is the distance between the starting and finishing lines. In a 100-meter sprint, for example, the distance is 100 meters. 	length of the route between two points	6.a
The SI unit for distance is the meter (1 m = 3.28 ft). Short distances may be measured in centimeters (1 cm = 0.01 m). Long distances may be measured in kilometers (1 km = 1000 m). For example, you might measure the distance a frogs tongue moves in centimeters and the distance a cheetah moves in kilometers. 	si unit for distance	7.e
Things dont always move in straight lines like the route from Mias house to the school. Sometimes they change direction as they move. For example, the route from Mias house to the post office changes from west to north at the school (see Figure 12.4). To find the total distance of a route that changes direction, you must add up the distances traveled in each direction. From Mias house to the school, for example, the distance is 2 kilometers. From the school to the post office, the distance is 1 kilometer. Therefore, the total distance from Mias house to the post office is 3 kilometers. You Try It! Problem: What is the distance from the post office to the park in Figure 12.4? Direction is just as important as distance in describing motion. For example, if Mia told a friend how to reach the post office from her house, she couldnt just say, "go 3 kilometers." The friend might end up at the park instead of the post office. Mia would have to be more specific. She could say, "go west for 2 kilometers and then go north for 1 kilometer." When both distance and direction are considered, motion is a vector. A vector is a quantity that includes both size and direction. A vector is represented by an arrow. The length of the arrow represents distance. The way the arrow points shows direction. The red arrows in Figure 12.4 are vectors for Mias route to the school and post office. If you want to learn more about vectors, watch the videos at these URLs:  (5:27) MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  You Try It! Problem: Draw vectors to represent the route from the post office to the park in Figure 12.4. 	direction is as important as distance in describing motion	true
Did you ever go to a track meet like the one pictured in Figure 12.3? Running events in track include 100-meter sprints and 2000-meter races. Races are named for their distance. Distance is the length of the route between two points. The length of the route in a race is the distance between the starting and finishing lines. In a 100-meter sprint, for example, the distance is 100 meters. 	most foot races are measured in meters	true
Maps can often be used to measure distance. Look at the map in Figure 12.4. Find Mias house and the school. You can use the map key to directly measure the distance between these two points. The distance is 2 kilometers. Measure it yourself to see if you agree. 	motion is generally defined as an increase in distance	false
Did you ever go to a track meet like the one pictured in Figure 12.3? Running events in track include 100-meter sprints and 2000-meter races. Races are named for their distance. Distance is the length of the route between two points. The length of the route in a race is the distance between the starting and finishing lines. In a 100-meter sprint, for example, the distance is 100 meters. 	direction is the length of the route between two points	false
The SI unit for distance is the meter (1 m = 3.28 ft). Short distances may be measured in centimeters (1 cm = 0.01 m). Long distances may be measured in kilometers (1 km = 1000 m). For example, you might measure the distance a frogs tongue moves in centimeters and the distance a cheetah moves in kilometers. 	short distances may be measured in centimeters	true
Maps can often be used to measure distance. Look at the map in Figure 12.4. Find Mias house and the school. You can use the map key to directly measure the distance between these two points. The distance is 2 kilometers. Measure it yourself to see if you agree. 	you can use a map to measure the distance between two points	true
Things dont always move in straight lines like the route from Mias house to the school. Sometimes they change direction as they move. For example, the route from Mias house to the post office changes from west to north at the school (see Figure 12.4). To find the total distance of a route that changes direction, you must add up the distances traveled in each direction. From Mias house to the school, for example, the distance is 2 kilometers. From the school to the post office, the distance is 1 kilometer. Therefore, the total distance from Mias house to the post office is 3 kilometers. You Try It! Problem: What is the distance from the post office to the park in Figure 12.4? Direction is just as important as distance in describing motion. For example, if Mia told a friend how to reach the post office from her house, she couldnt just say, "go 3 kilometers." The friend might end up at the park instead of the post office. Mia would have to be more specific. She could say, "go west for 2 kilometers and then go north for 1 kilometer." When both distance and direction are considered, motion is a vector. A vector is a quantity that includes both size and direction. A vector is represented by an arrow. The length of the arrow represents distance. The way the arrow points shows direction. The red arrows in Figure 12.4 are vectors for Mias route to the school and post office. If you want to learn more about vectors, watch the videos at these URLs:  (5:27) MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  You Try It! Problem: Draw vectors to represent the route from the post office to the park in Figure 12.4. 	a vector is any quantity that has no units of measurement	false
Maps can often be used to measure distance. Look at the map in Figure 12.4. Find Mias house and the school. You can use the map key to directly measure the distance between these two points. The distance is 2 kilometers. Measure it yourself to see if you agree. 	you can measure the distance an object travels only if it does not change direction	false
Things dont always move in straight lines like the route from Mias house to the school. Sometimes they change direction as they move. For example, the route from Mias house to the post office changes from west to north at the school (see Figure 12.4). To find the total distance of a route that changes direction, you must add up the distances traveled in each direction. From Mias house to the school, for example, the distance is 2 kilometers. From the school to the post office, the distance is 1 kilometer. Therefore, the total distance from Mias house to the post office is 3 kilometers. You Try It! Problem: What is the distance from the post office to the park in Figure 12.4? Direction is just as important as distance in describing motion. For example, if Mia told a friend how to reach the post office from her house, she couldnt just say, "go 3 kilometers." The friend might end up at the park instead of the post office. Mia would have to be more specific. She could say, "go west for 2 kilometers and then go north for 1 kilometer." When both distance and direction are considered, motion is a vector. A vector is a quantity that includes both size and direction. A vector is represented by an arrow. The length of the arrow represents distance. The way the arrow points shows direction. The red arrows in Figure 12.4 are vectors for Mias route to the school and post office. If you want to learn more about vectors, watch the videos at these URLs:  (5:27) MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  You Try It! Problem: Draw vectors to represent the route from the post office to the park in Figure 12.4. 	motion is a vector when it includes only direction	false
The SI unit for distance is the meter (1 m = 3.28 ft). Short distances may be measured in centimeters (1 cm = 0.01 m). Long distances may be measured in kilometers (1 km = 1000 m). For example, you might measure the distance a frogs tongue moves in centimeters and the distance a cheetah moves in kilometers. 	you could measure distances with a metric ruler	true
Maps can often be used to measure distance. Look at the map in Figure 12.4. Find Mias house and the school. You can use the map key to directly measure the distance between these two points. The distance is 2 kilometers. Measure it yourself to see if you agree. 	speed is one way to measure motion	true
Things dont always move in straight lines like the route from Mias house to the school. Sometimes they change direction as they move. For example, the route from Mias house to the post office changes from west to north at the school (see Figure 12.4). To find the total distance of a route that changes direction, you must add up the distances traveled in each direction. From Mias house to the school, for example, the distance is 2 kilometers. From the school to the post office, the distance is 1 kilometer. Therefore, the total distance from Mias house to the post office is 3 kilometers. You Try It! Problem: What is the distance from the post office to the park in Figure 12.4? Direction is just as important as distance in describing motion. For example, if Mia told a friend how to reach the post office from her house, she couldnt just say, "go 3 kilometers." The friend might end up at the park instead of the post office. Mia would have to be more specific. She could say, "go west for 2 kilometers and then go north for 1 kilometer." When both distance and direction are considered, motion is a vector. A vector is a quantity that includes both size and direction. A vector is represented by an arrow. The length of the arrow represents distance. The way the arrow points shows direction. The red arrows in Figure 12.4 are vectors for Mias route to the school and post office. If you want to learn more about vectors, watch the videos at these URLs:  (5:27) MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  You Try It! Problem: Draw vectors to represent the route from the post office to the park in Figure 12.4. 	the length of a vector arrow represents direction	false
Did you ever go to a track meet like the one pictured in Figure 12.3? Running events in track include 100-meter sprints and 2000-meter races. Races are named for their distance. Distance is the length of the route between two points. The length of the route in a race is the distance between the starting and finishing lines. In a 100-meter sprint, for example, the distance is 100 meters. 	words that describe direction include east up and left	true
Speed tells you only how fast an object is moving. It doesnt tell you the direction the object is moving. The measure of both speed and direction is called velocity. Velocity is a vector that can be represented by an arrow. The length of the arrow represents speed, and the way the arrow points represents direction. The three arrows in Figure directions. They represent objects moving at the same speed but in different directions. Vector C is shorter than vector A or B but points in the same direction as vector A. It represents an object moving at a slower speed than A or B but in the same direction as A. If youre still not sure of the difference between speed and velocity, watch the cartoon at this URL:  (2:10). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  In general, if two objects are moving at the same speed and in the same direction, they have the same velocity. If two objects are moving at the same speed but in different directions (like A and B in Figure 12.9), they have different velocities. If two objects are moving in the same direction but at a different speed (like A and C in Figure 12.9), they have different velocities. A moving object that changes direction also has a different velocity, even if its speed does not change. 	both speed and velocity are vectors	false
The motion of an object can be represented by a distance-time graph like the one in Figure 12.8. A distance-time graph shows how the distance from the starting point changes over time. The graph in Figure 12.8 represents a bike trip. The trip began at 7:30 AM (A) and ended at 12:30 PM (F). The rider traveled from the starting point to a destination and then returned to the starting point again. 	the symbol t represents a change in time	true
Speed tells you only how fast an object is moving. It doesnt tell you the direction the object is moving. The measure of both speed and direction is called velocity. Velocity is a vector that can be represented by an arrow. The length of the arrow represents speed, and the way the arrow points represents direction. The three arrows in Figure directions. They represent objects moving at the same speed but in different directions. Vector C is shorter than vector A or B but points in the same direction as vector A. It represents an object moving at a slower speed than A or B but in the same direction as A. If youre still not sure of the difference between speed and velocity, watch the cartoon at this URL:  (2:10). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  In general, if two objects are moving at the same speed and in the same direction, they have the same velocity. If two objects are moving at the same speed but in different directions (like A and B in Figure 12.9), they have different velocities. If two objects are moving in the same direction but at a different speed (like A and C in Figure 12.9), they have different velocities. A moving object that changes direction also has a different velocity, even if its speed does not change. 	the length of a velocity arrow represents distance	false
In a distance-time graph, the speed of the object is represented by the slope, or steepness, of the graph line. If the line is straight, like the line between A and B in Figure 12.8, then the speed is constant. The average speed can be calculated from the graph. The change in distance (represented by Dd) divided by the change in time (represented by Dt): speed = Dd Dt For example, the speed between A and B in Figure 12.8 is: speed = Dd 20 km 0 km 20 km = = = 20 km/h Dt 8:30 7:30 h 1h If the graph line is horizontal, as it is between B and C, then the slope and the speed are zero: speed = Dd 20 km 20 km 0 km = = = 0 km/h Dt 9:00 8:30 h 0.5 h You Try It! Problem: In Figure 12.8, calculate the speed of the rider between C and D. 	a straight line on a distancetime graph means that speed is zero	false
If you know the speed of a moving object, you can also calculate the distance it will travel in a given amount of time. To do so, you would use this version of the general speed formula: distance = speed  time For example, if a car travels at a speed of 60 km/h for 2 hours, then the distance traveled is: distance = 60 km/h  2 h = 120 km You Try It! Problem: If Maria runs at a speed of 2 m/s, how far will she run in 60 seconds? 	speed is negative when an object moves backward	false
If you know the speed of a moving object, you can also calculate the distance it will travel in a given amount of time. To do so, you would use this version of the general speed formula: distance = speed  time For example, if a car travels at a speed of 60 km/h for 2 hours, then the distance traveled is: distance = 60 km/h  2 h = 120 km You Try It! Problem: If Maria runs at a speed of 2 m/s, how far will she run in 60 seconds? 	speed depends on both distance and direction	false
If you know the speed of a moving object, you can also calculate the distance it will travel in a given amount of time. To do so, you would use this version of the general speed formula: distance = speed  time For example, if a car travels at a speed of 60 km/h for 2 hours, then the distance traveled is: distance = 60 km/h  2 h = 120 km You Try It! Problem: If Maria runs at a speed of 2 m/s, how far will she run in 60 seconds? 	it is easier to calculate average speed than instantaneous speed	true
The motion of an object can be represented by a distance-time graph like the one in Figure 12.8. A distance-time graph shows how the distance from the starting point changes over time. The graph in Figure 12.8 represents a bike trip. The trip began at 7:30 AM (A) and ended at 12:30 PM (F). The rider traveled from the starting point to a destination and then returned to the starting point again. 	the slope of a distancetime graph represents the direction of motion	false
Speed tells you only how fast an object is moving. It doesnt tell you the direction the object is moving. The measure of both speed and direction is called velocity. Velocity is a vector that can be represented by an arrow. The length of the arrow represents speed, and the way the arrow points represents direction. The three arrows in Figure directions. They represent objects moving at the same speed but in different directions. Vector C is shorter than vector A or B but points in the same direction as vector A. It represents an object moving at a slower speed than A or B but in the same direction as A. If youre still not sure of the difference between speed and velocity, watch the cartoon at this URL:  (2:10). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  In general, if two objects are moving at the same speed and in the same direction, they have the same velocity. If two objects are moving at the same speed but in different directions (like A and B in Figure 12.9), they have different velocities. If two objects are moving in the same direction but at a different speed (like A and C in Figure 12.9), they have different velocities. A moving object that changes direction also has a different velocity, even if its speed does not change. 	velocity is the scientific term for speed	false
In a distance-time graph, the speed of the object is represented by the slope, or steepness, of the graph line. If the line is straight, like the line between A and B in Figure 12.8, then the speed is constant. The average speed can be calculated from the graph. The change in distance (represented by Dd) divided by the change in time (represented by Dt): speed = Dd Dt For example, the speed between A and B in Figure 12.8 is: speed = Dd 20 km 0 km 20 km = = = 20 km/h Dt 8:30 7:30 h 1h If the graph line is horizontal, as it is between B and C, then the slope and the speed are zero: speed = Dd 20 km 20 km 0 km = = = 0 km/h Dt 9:00 8:30 h 0.5 h You Try It! Problem: In Figure 12.8, calculate the speed of the rider between C and D. 	speed can only be greater than or equal to zero	true
Speed tells you only how fast an object is moving. It doesnt tell you the direction the object is moving. The measure of both speed and direction is called velocity. Velocity is a vector that can be represented by an arrow. The length of the arrow represents speed, and the way the arrow points represents direction. The three arrows in Figure directions. They represent objects moving at the same speed but in different directions. Vector C is shorter than vector A or B but points in the same direction as vector A. It represents an object moving at a slower speed than A or B but in the same direction as A. If youre still not sure of the difference between speed and velocity, watch the cartoon at this URL:  (2:10). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  In general, if two objects are moving at the same speed and in the same direction, they have the same velocity. If two objects are moving at the same speed but in different directions (like A and B in Figure 12.9), they have different velocities. If two objects are moving in the same direction but at a different speed (like A and C in Figure 12.9), they have different velocities. A moving object that changes direction also has a different velocity, even if its speed does not change. 	objects moving at the same speed always have the same velocity	false
In a distance-time graph, the speed of the object is represented by the slope, or steepness, of the graph line. If the line is straight, like the line between A and B in Figure 12.8, then the speed is constant. The average speed can be calculated from the graph. The change in distance (represented by Dd) divided by the change in time (represented by Dt): speed = Dd Dt For example, the speed between A and B in Figure 12.8 is: speed = Dd 20 km 0 km 20 km = = = 20 km/h Dt 8:30 7:30 h 1h If the graph line is horizontal, as it is between B and C, then the slope and the speed are zero: speed = Dd 20 km 20 km 0 km = = = 0 km/h Dt 9:00 8:30 h 0.5 h You Try It! Problem: In Figure 12.8, calculate the speed of the rider between C and D. 	average speed can be calculated from a distancetime graph	true
If you know the speed of a moving object, you can also calculate the distance it will travel in a given amount of time. To do so, you would use this version of the general speed formula: distance = speed  time For example, if a car travels at a speed of 60 km/h for 2 hours, then the distance traveled is: distance = 60 km/h  2 h = 120 km You Try It! Problem: If Maria runs at a speed of 2 m/s, how far will she run in 60 seconds? 	speed equals distance multiplied by time	false
Speed tells you only how fast an object is moving. It doesnt tell you the direction the object is moving. The measure of both speed and direction is called velocity. Velocity is a vector that can be represented by an arrow. The length of the arrow represents speed, and the way the arrow points represents direction. The three arrows in Figure directions. They represent objects moving at the same speed but in different directions. Vector C is shorter than vector A or B but points in the same direction as vector A. It represents an object moving at a slower speed than A or B but in the same direction as A. If youre still not sure of the difference between speed and velocity, watch the cartoon at this URL:  (2:10). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  In general, if two objects are moving at the same speed and in the same direction, they have the same velocity. If two objects are moving at the same speed but in different directions (like A and B in Figure 12.9), they have different velocities. If two objects are moving in the same direction but at a different speed (like A and C in Figure 12.9), they have different velocities. A moving object that changes direction also has a different velocity, even if its speed does not change. 	a change in speed can occur without a change in velocity	false
Speed tells you only how fast an object is moving. It doesnt tell you the direction the object is moving. The measure of both speed and direction is called velocity. Velocity is a vector that can be represented by an arrow. The length of the arrow represents speed, and the way the arrow points represents direction. The three arrows in Figure directions. They represent objects moving at the same speed but in different directions. Vector C is shorter than vector A or B but points in the same direction as vector A. It represents an object moving at a slower speed than A or B but in the same direction as A. If youre still not sure of the difference between speed and velocity, watch the cartoon at this URL:  (2:10). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  In general, if two objects are moving at the same speed and in the same direction, they have the same velocity. If two objects are moving at the same speed but in different directions (like A and B in Figure 12.9), they have different velocities. If two objects are moving in the same direction but at a different speed (like A and C in Figure 12.9), they have different velocities. A moving object that changes direction also has a different velocity, even if its speed does not change. 	a change in velocity can occur without a change in speed	true
Speed tells you only how fast an object is moving. It doesnt tell you the direction the object is moving. The measure of both speed and direction is called velocity. Velocity is a vector that can be represented by an arrow. The length of the arrow represents speed, and the way the arrow points represents direction. The three arrows in Figure directions. They represent objects moving at the same speed but in different directions. Vector C is shorter than vector A or B but points in the same direction as vector A. It represents an object moving at a slower speed than A or B but in the same direction as A. If youre still not sure of the difference between speed and velocity, watch the cartoon at this URL:  (2:10). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  In general, if two objects are moving at the same speed and in the same direction, they have the same velocity. If two objects are moving at the same speed but in different directions (like A and B in Figure 12.9), they have different velocities. If two objects are moving in the same direction but at a different speed (like A and C in Figure 12.9), they have different velocities. A moving object that changes direction also has a different velocity, even if its speed does not change. 	measure of both speed and direction	1.b
If you know the speed of a moving object, you can also calculate the distance it will travel in a given amount of time. To do so, you would use this version of the general speed formula: distance = speed  time For example, if a car travels at a speed of 60 km/h for 2 hours, then the distance traveled is: distance = 60 km/h  2 h = 120 km You Try It! Problem: If Maria runs at a speed of 2 m/s, how far will she run in 60 seconds? 	distance  speed	2.g
If you know the speed of a moving object, you can also calculate the distance it will travel in a given amount of time. To do so, you would use this version of the general speed formula: distance = speed  time For example, if a car travels at a speed of 60 km/h for 2 hours, then the distance traveled is: distance = 60 km/h  2 h = 120 km You Try It! Problem: If Maria runs at a speed of 2 m/s, how far will she run in 60 seconds? 	speed of a moving object at a given moment	3.c
If you know the speed of a moving object, you can also calculate the distance it will travel in a given amount of time. To do so, you would use this version of the general speed formula: distance = speed  time For example, if a car travels at a speed of 60 km/h for 2 hours, then the distance traveled is: distance = 60 km/h  2 h = 120 km You Try It! Problem: If Maria runs at a speed of 2 m/s, how far will she run in 60 seconds? 	speed  time	4.f
Speed is an important aspect of motion. It is a measure of how fast or slow something moves. It depends on how far something travels and how long it takes to travel that far. Speed can be calculated using this general formula: speed = distance time A familiar example is the speed of a car. In the U.S., this is usually expressed in miles per hour (see Figure 12.6). If your family makes a car trip that covers 120 miles and takes 3 hours, then the cars speed is: speed = 120 mi = 40 mi/h 3h The speed of a car may also be expressed in kilometers per hour (km/h). The SI unit for speed is meters per second (m/s). 	general term for how quickly or slowly something moves	5.a
If you know the speed of a moving object, you can also calculate the distance it will travel in a given amount of time. To do so, you would use this version of the general speed formula: distance = speed  time For example, if a car travels at a speed of 60 km/h for 2 hours, then the distance traveled is: distance = 60 km/h  2 h = 120 km You Try It! Problem: If Maria runs at a speed of 2 m/s, how far will she run in 60 seconds? 	total distance traveled divided by the time it took to travel that distance	6.d
In a distance-time graph, the speed of the object is represented by the slope, or steepness, of the graph line. If the line is straight, like the line between A and B in Figure 12.8, then the speed is constant. The average speed can be calculated from the graph. The change in distance (represented by Dd) divided by the change in time (represented by Dt): speed = Dd Dt For example, the speed between A and B in Figure 12.8 is: speed = Dd 20 km 0 km 20 km = = = 20 km/h Dt 8:30 7:30 h 1h If the graph line is horizontal, as it is between B and C, then the slope and the speed are zero: speed = Dd 20 km 20 km 0 km = = = 0 km/h Dt 9:00 8:30 h 0.5 h You Try It! Problem: In Figure 12.8, calculate the speed of the rider between C and D. 	steepness of a graph line	7.e
Acceleration is a measure of the change in velocity of a moving object. It shows how quickly velocity changes. Acceleration may reflect a change in speed, a change in direction, or both. Because acceleration includes both a size (speed) and direction, it is a vector. People commonly think of acceleration as an increase in speed, but a decrease in speed is also acceleration. In this case, acceleration is negative. Negative acceleration may be called deceleration. A change in direction without a change in speed is acceleration as well. You can see several examples of acceleration in Figure 12.11. If you are accelerating, you may be able to feel the change in velocity. This is true whether you change your speed or your direction. Think about what it feels like to ride in a car. As the car speeds up, you feel as though you are being pressed against the seat. The opposite occurs when the car slows down, especially if the change in speed is 	speed plus direction of motion	1.f
Acceleration is a measure of the change in velocity of a moving object. It shows how quickly velocity changes. Acceleration may reflect a change in speed, a change in direction, or both. Because acceleration includes both a size (speed) and direction, it is a vector. People commonly think of acceleration as an increase in speed, but a decrease in speed is also acceleration. In this case, acceleration is negative. Negative acceleration may be called deceleration. A change in direction without a change in speed is acceleration as well. You can see several examples of acceleration in Figure 12.11. If you are accelerating, you may be able to feel the change in velocity. This is true whether you change your speed or your direction. Think about what it feels like to ride in a car. As the car speeds up, you feel as though you are being pressed against the seat. The opposite occurs when the car slows down, especially if the change in speed is 	negative acceleration	2.c
Calculating acceleration is complicated if both speed and direction are changing. Its easier to calculate acceleration when only speed is changing. To calculate acceleration without a change in direction, you just divide the change in velocity (represented by Dv) by the change in time (represented by Dt). The formula for acceleration in this case is: Acceleration = Dv Dt Consider this example. The cyclist in Figure 12.12 speeds up as he goes downhill on this straight trail. His velocity changes from 1 meter per second at the top of the hill to 6 meters per second at the bottom. If it takes 5 seconds for him to reach the bottom, what is his acceleration, on average, as he flies down the hill? Acceleration = Dv 6 m/s 1 m/s 5 m/s 1 m/s = = = = 1 m/s2 Dt 5s 5s 1m In words, this means that for each second the cyclist travels downhill, his velocity increases by 1 meter per second (on average). The answer to this problem is expressed in the SI unit for acceleration: m/s2 ("meters per second squared"). You Try It! Problem: Tranh slowed his skateboard as he approached the street. He went from 8 m/s to 2 m/s in a period of 3 seconds. What was his acceleration? 	si unit for acceleration	3.g
Acceleration is a measure of the change in velocity of a moving object. It shows how quickly velocity changes. Acceleration may reflect a change in speed, a change in direction, or both. Because acceleration includes both a size (speed) and direction, it is a vector. People commonly think of acceleration as an increase in speed, but a decrease in speed is also acceleration. In this case, acceleration is negative. Negative acceleration may be called deceleration. A change in direction without a change in speed is acceleration as well. You can see several examples of acceleration in Figure 12.11. If you are accelerating, you may be able to feel the change in velocity. This is true whether you change your speed or your direction. Think about what it feels like to ride in a car. As the car speeds up, you feel as though you are being pressed against the seat. The opposite occurs when the car slows down, especially if the change in speed is 	symbol for a change in velocity	4.e
Acceleration is a measure of the change in velocity of a moving object. It shows how quickly velocity changes. Acceleration may reflect a change in speed, a change in direction, or both. Because acceleration includes both a size (speed) and direction, it is a vector. People commonly think of acceleration as an increase in speed, but a decrease in speed is also acceleration. In this case, acceleration is negative. Negative acceleration may be called deceleration. A change in direction without a change in speed is acceleration as well. You can see several examples of acceleration in Figure 12.11. If you are accelerating, you may be able to feel the change in velocity. This is true whether you change your speed or your direction. Think about what it feels like to ride in a car. As the car speeds up, you feel as though you are being pressed against the seat. The opposite occurs when the car slows down, especially if the change in speed is 	measure of a change in velocity	5.a
Acceleration is a measure of the change in velocity of a moving object. It shows how quickly velocity changes. Acceleration may reflect a change in speed, a change in direction, or both. Because acceleration includes both a size (speed) and direction, it is a vector. People commonly think of acceleration as an increase in speed, but a decrease in speed is also acceleration. In this case, acceleration is negative. Negative acceleration may be called deceleration. A change in direction without a change in speed is acceleration as well. You can see several examples of acceleration in Figure 12.11. If you are accelerating, you may be able to feel the change in velocity. This is true whether you change your speed or your direction. Think about what it feels like to ride in a car. As the car speeds up, you feel as though you are being pressed against the seat. The opposite occurs when the car slows down, especially if the change in speed is 	symbol for a change in time	6.b
Acceleration is a measure of the change in velocity of a moving object. It shows how quickly velocity changes. Acceleration may reflect a change in speed, a change in direction, or both. Because acceleration includes both a size (speed) and direction, it is a vector. People commonly think of acceleration as an increase in speed, but a decrease in speed is also acceleration. In this case, acceleration is negative. Negative acceleration may be called deceleration. A change in direction without a change in speed is acceleration as well. You can see several examples of acceleration in Figure 12.11. If you are accelerating, you may be able to feel the change in velocity. This is true whether you change your speed or your direction. Think about what it feels like to ride in a car. As the car speeds up, you feel as though you are being pressed against the seat. The opposite occurs when the car slows down, especially if the change in speed is 	how quickly an object changes position	7.d
Acceleration is a measure of the change in velocity of a moving object. It shows how quickly velocity changes. Acceleration may reflect a change in speed, a change in direction, or both. Because acceleration includes both a size (speed) and direction, it is a vector. People commonly think of acceleration as an increase in speed, but a decrease in speed is also acceleration. In this case, acceleration is negative. Negative acceleration may be called deceleration. A change in direction without a change in speed is acceleration as well. You can see several examples of acceleration in Figure 12.11. If you are accelerating, you may be able to feel the change in velocity. This is true whether you change your speed or your direction. Think about what it feels like to ride in a car. As the car speeds up, you feel as though you are being pressed against the seat. The opposite occurs when the car slows down, especially if the change in speed is 	acceleration is a vector	true
Acceleration is a measure of the change in velocity of a moving object. It shows how quickly velocity changes. Acceleration may reflect a change in speed, a change in direction, or both. Because acceleration includes both a size (speed) and direction, it is a vector. People commonly think of acceleration as an increase in speed, but a decrease in speed is also acceleration. In this case, acceleration is negative. Negative acceleration may be called deceleration. A change in direction without a change in speed is acceleration as well. You can see several examples of acceleration in Figure 12.11. If you are accelerating, you may be able to feel the change in velocity. This is true whether you change your speed or your direction. Think about what it feels like to ride in a car. As the car speeds up, you feel as though you are being pressed against the seat. The opposite occurs when the car slows down, especially if the change in speed is 	acceleration shows how quickly velocity changes	true
Acceleration is a measure of the change in velocity of a moving object. It shows how quickly velocity changes. Acceleration may reflect a change in speed, a change in direction, or both. Because acceleration includes both a size (speed) and direction, it is a vector. People commonly think of acceleration as an increase in speed, but a decrease in speed is also acceleration. In this case, acceleration is negative. Negative acceleration may be called deceleration. A change in direction without a change in speed is acceleration as well. You can see several examples of acceleration in Figure 12.11. If you are accelerating, you may be able to feel the change in velocity. This is true whether you change your speed or your direction. Think about what it feels like to ride in a car. As the car speeds up, you feel as though you are being pressed against the seat. The opposite occurs when the car slows down, especially if the change in speed is 	a change in direction without a change in speed is not acceleration	false
The acceleration of an object can be represented by a velocity-time graph like the one in Figure 12.13. A velocity- time graph shows how velocity changes over time. It is similar to a distance-time graph except the y axis represents velocity instead of distance. The graph in Figure 12.13 represents the velocity of a sprinter on a straight track. The runner speeds up for the first 4 seconds of the race, then runs at a constant velocity for the next 3 seconds, and finally slows to a stop during the last 3 seconds of the race. In a velocity-time graph, acceleration is represented by the slope of the graph line. If the line slopes upward, like the line between A and B in Figure 12.13, velocity is increasing, so acceleration is positive. If the line is horizontal, as it is between B and C, velocity is not changing, so acceleration is zero. If the line slopes downward, like the line between C and D, velocity is decreasing, so acceleration is negative. You can review the concept of acceleration as well as other chapter concepts by watching the musical video at this URL: 	a velocitytime graph shows how velocity changes over time	true
The acceleration of an object can be represented by a velocity-time graph like the one in Figure 12.13. A velocity- time graph shows how velocity changes over time. It is similar to a distance-time graph except the y axis represents velocity instead of distance. The graph in Figure 12.13 represents the velocity of a sprinter on a straight track. The runner speeds up for the first 4 seconds of the race, then runs at a constant velocity for the next 3 seconds, and finally slows to a stop during the last 3 seconds of the race. In a velocity-time graph, acceleration is represented by the slope of the graph line. If the line slopes upward, like the line between A and B in Figure 12.13, velocity is increasing, so acceleration is positive. If the line is horizontal, as it is between B and C, velocity is not changing, so acceleration is zero. If the line slopes downward, like the line between C and D, velocity is decreasing, so acceleration is negative. You can review the concept of acceleration as well as other chapter concepts by watching the musical video at this URL: 	acceleration is always greater than or equal to zero	false
Acceleration is a measure of the change in velocity of a moving object. It shows how quickly velocity changes. Acceleration may reflect a change in speed, a change in direction, or both. Because acceleration includes both a size (speed) and direction, it is a vector. People commonly think of acceleration as an increase in speed, but a decrease in speed is also acceleration. In this case, acceleration is negative. Negative acceleration may be called deceleration. A change in direction without a change in speed is acceleration as well. You can see several examples of acceleration in Figure 12.11. If you are accelerating, you may be able to feel the change in velocity. This is true whether you change your speed or your direction. Think about what it feels like to ride in a car. As the car speeds up, you feel as though you are being pressed against the seat. The opposite occurs when the car slows down, especially if the change in speed is 	acceleration occurs only when there is a change in speed	false
Calculating acceleration is complicated if both speed and direction are changing. Its easier to calculate acceleration when only speed is changing. To calculate acceleration without a change in direction, you just divide the change in velocity (represented by Dv) by the change in time (represented by Dt). The formula for acceleration in this case is: Acceleration = Dv Dt Consider this example. The cyclist in Figure 12.12 speeds up as he goes downhill on this straight trail. His velocity changes from 1 meter per second at the top of the hill to 6 meters per second at the bottom. If it takes 5 seconds for him to reach the bottom, what is his acceleration, on average, as he flies down the hill? Acceleration = Dv 6 m/s 1 m/s 5 m/s 1 m/s = = = = 1 m/s2 Dt 5s 5s 1m In words, this means that for each second the cyclist travels downhill, his velocity increases by 1 meter per second (on average). The answer to this problem is expressed in the SI unit for acceleration: m/s2 ("meters per second squared"). You Try It! Problem: Tranh slowed his skateboard as he approached the street. He went from 8 m/s to 2 m/s in a period of 3 seconds. What was his acceleration? 	it is easier to calculate acceleration when both speed and direction are changing	false
The acceleration of an object can be represented by a velocity-time graph like the one in Figure 12.13. A velocity- time graph shows how velocity changes over time. It is similar to a distance-time graph except the y axis represents velocity instead of distance. The graph in Figure 12.13 represents the velocity of a sprinter on a straight track. The runner speeds up for the first 4 seconds of the race, then runs at a constant velocity for the next 3 seconds, and finally slows to a stop during the last 3 seconds of the race. In a velocity-time graph, acceleration is represented by the slope of the graph line. If the line slopes upward, like the line between A and B in Figure 12.13, velocity is increasing, so acceleration is positive. If the line is horizontal, as it is between B and C, velocity is not changing, so acceleration is zero. If the line slopes downward, like the line between C and D, velocity is decreasing, so acceleration is negative. You can review the concept of acceleration as well as other chapter concepts by watching the musical video at this URL: 	the yaxis of a velocitytime graph represents distance traveled	false
The acceleration of an object can be represented by a velocity-time graph like the one in Figure 12.13. A velocity- time graph shows how velocity changes over time. It is similar to a distance-time graph except the y axis represents velocity instead of distance. The graph in Figure 12.13 represents the velocity of a sprinter on a straight track. The runner speeds up for the first 4 seconds of the race, then runs at a constant velocity for the next 3 seconds, and finally slows to a stop during the last 3 seconds of the race. In a velocity-time graph, acceleration is represented by the slope of the graph line. If the line slopes upward, like the line between A and B in Figure 12.13, velocity is increasing, so acceleration is positive. If the line is horizontal, as it is between B and C, velocity is not changing, so acceleration is zero. If the line slopes downward, like the line between C and D, velocity is decreasing, so acceleration is negative. You can review the concept of acceleration as well as other chapter concepts by watching the musical video at this URL: 	if a velocitytime graph slopes downward to the right then acceleration is negative	true
The acceleration of an object can be represented by a velocity-time graph like the one in Figure 12.13. A velocity- time graph shows how velocity changes over time. It is similar to a distance-time graph except the y axis represents velocity instead of distance. The graph in Figure 12.13 represents the velocity of a sprinter on a straight track. The runner speeds up for the first 4 seconds of the race, then runs at a constant velocity for the next 3 seconds, and finally slows to a stop during the last 3 seconds of the race. In a velocity-time graph, acceleration is represented by the slope of the graph line. If the line slopes upward, like the line between A and B in Figure 12.13, velocity is increasing, so acceleration is positive. If the line is horizontal, as it is between B and C, velocity is not changing, so acceleration is zero. If the line slopes downward, like the line between C and D, velocity is decreasing, so acceleration is negative. You can review the concept of acceleration as well as other chapter concepts by watching the musical video at this URL: 	if velocity is not changing then acceleration is zero	true
Acceleration is a measure of the change in velocity of a moving object. It shows how quickly velocity changes. Acceleration may reflect a change in speed, a change in direction, or both. Because acceleration includes both a size (speed) and direction, it is a vector. People commonly think of acceleration as an increase in speed, but a decrease in speed is also acceleration. In this case, acceleration is negative. Negative acceleration may be called deceleration. A change in direction without a change in speed is acceleration as well. You can see several examples of acceleration in Figure 12.11. If you are accelerating, you may be able to feel the change in velocity. This is true whether you change your speed or your direction. Think about what it feels like to ride in a car. As the car speeds up, you feel as though you are being pressed against the seat. The opposite occurs when the car slows down, especially if the change in speed is 	a change in direction with or without a change in speed is velocity	false
The acceleration of an object can be represented by a velocity-time graph like the one in Figure 12.13. A velocity- time graph shows how velocity changes over time. It is similar to a distance-time graph except the y axis represents velocity instead of distance. The graph in Figure 12.13 represents the velocity of a sprinter on a straight track. The runner speeds up for the first 4 seconds of the race, then runs at a constant velocity for the next 3 seconds, and finally slows to a stop during the last 3 seconds of the race. In a velocity-time graph, acceleration is represented by the slope of the graph line. If the line slopes upward, like the line between A and B in Figure 12.13, velocity is increasing, so acceleration is positive. If the line is horizontal, as it is between B and C, velocity is not changing, so acceleration is zero. If the line slopes downward, like the line between C and D, velocity is decreasing, so acceleration is negative. You can review the concept of acceleration as well as other chapter concepts by watching the musical video at this URL: 	if the slope of a velocitytime graph is a straight line then velocity must be constant	false
Force is defined as a push or a pull acting on an object. Examples of forces include friction and gravity. Both are covered in detail later in this chapter. Another example of force is applied force. It occurs when a person or thing applies force to an object, like the girl pushing the swing in Figure 13.1. The force of the push causes the swing to move. 	mass is a measure of the force of gravity on an object	false
More than one force may act on an object at the same time. In fact, just about all objects on Earth have at least two forces acting on them at all times. One force is gravity, which pulls objects down toward the center of Earth. The other force is an upward force that may be provided by the ground or other surface. Consider the example in Figure 13.3. A book is resting on a table. Gravity pulls the book downward with a force of 20 newtons. At the same time, the table pushes the book upward with a force of 20 newtons. The combined forces acting on the book  or any other object  are called the net force. This is the overall force acting on an object that takes into account all of the individual forces acting on the object. You can learn more about the concept of net force at this URL:  . 	most objects have at least two forces acting on them at all times	true
When two forces act on an object in opposite directions, like the book on the table, the net force is equal to the difference between the two forces. In other words, one force is subtracted from the other to calculate the net force. If the opposing forces are equal in strength, the net force is zero. Thats what happens with the book on the table. The upward force minus the downward force equals zero (20 N up - 20 N down = 0 N). Because the forces on the book are balanced, the book remains on the table and doesnt move. In addition to these downward and upward forces, which generally cancel each other out, forces may push or pull an object in other directions. Look at the dogs playing tug-of-war in Figure 13.4. One dog is pulling on the rope with a force of 10 newtons to the left. The other dog is pulling on the rope with a force of 12 newtons to the right. These opposing forces are not equal in strength, so they are unbalanced. When opposing forces are unbalanced, the net force is greater than zero. The net force on the rope is 2 newtons to the right, so the rope will move to the right. 	if opposing forces are unequal in strength the net force is less than zero	false
The SI unit of force is the newton (N). One newton is the amount of force that causes a mass of 1 kilogram to accelerate at 1 m/s2 . Thus, the newton can also be expressed as kgm/s2 . The newton was named for the scientist Sir Isaac Newton, who is famous for his law of gravity. Youll learn more about Sir Isaac Newton later in the chapter. 	the si unit for weight is the newton	true
Two forces may act on an object in the same direction. You can see an example of this in Figure 13.5. After the man on the left lifts up the couch, he will push the couch to the right with a force of 25 newtons. At the same time, the man to the right is pulling the couch to the right with a force of 20 newtons. When two forces act in the same direction, the net force is equal to the sum of the forces. This always results in a stronger force than either of the individual forces alone. In this case, the net force on the couch is 45 newtons to the right, so the couch will move to the right. You Try It! Problem: The boys in the drawing above are about to kick the soccer ball in opposite directions. What will be the net force on the ball? In which direction will the ball move? 	when two forces act on an object in the same direction the net force equals zero	false
Two forces may act on an object in the same direction. You can see an example of this in Figure 13.5. After the man on the left lifts up the couch, he will push the couch to the right with a force of 25 newtons. At the same time, the man to the right is pulling the couch to the right with a force of 20 newtons. When two forces act in the same direction, the net force is equal to the sum of the forces. This always results in a stronger force than either of the individual forces alone. In this case, the net force on the couch is 45 newtons to the right, so the couch will move to the right. You Try It! Problem: The boys in the drawing above are about to kick the soccer ball in opposite directions. What will be the net force on the ball? In which direction will the ball move? 	when forces act in opposite directions on an object they are subtracted to yield the net force	true
Force is defined as a push or a pull acting on an object. Examples of forces include friction and gravity. Both are covered in detail later in this chapter. Another example of force is applied force. It occurs when a person or thing applies force to an object, like the girl pushing the swing in Figure 13.1. The force of the push causes the swing to move. 	every sport involves forces	true
Two forces may act on an object in the same direction. You can see an example of this in Figure 13.5. After the man on the left lifts up the couch, he will push the couch to the right with a force of 25 newtons. At the same time, the man to the right is pulling the couch to the right with a force of 20 newtons. When two forces act in the same direction, the net force is equal to the sum of the forces. This always results in a stronger force than either of the individual forces alone. In this case, the net force on the couch is 45 newtons to the right, so the couch will move to the right. You Try It! Problem: The boys in the drawing above are about to kick the soccer ball in opposite directions. What will be the net force on the ball? In which direction will the ball move? 	forces are always balanced when they act on an object in the same direction	false
Force is defined as a push or a pull acting on an object. Examples of forces include friction and gravity. Both are covered in detail later in this chapter. Another example of force is applied force. It occurs when a person or thing applies force to an object, like the girl pushing the swing in Figure 13.1. The force of the push causes the swing to move. 	whenever an object is stationary it has no forces acting on it	false
Two forces may act on an object in the same direction. You can see an example of this in Figure 13.5. After the man on the left lifts up the couch, he will push the couch to the right with a force of 25 newtons. At the same time, the man to the right is pulling the couch to the right with a force of 20 newtons. When two forces act in the same direction, the net force is equal to the sum of the forces. This always results in a stronger force than either of the individual forces alone. In this case, the net force on the couch is 45 newtons to the right, so the couch will move to the right. You Try It! Problem: The boys in the drawing above are about to kick the soccer ball in opposite directions. What will be the net force on the ball? In which direction will the ball move? 	two forces acting in the same direction always result in a stronger force	true
Force is defined as a push or a pull acting on an object. Examples of forces include friction and gravity. Both are covered in detail later in this chapter. Another example of force is applied force. It occurs when a person or thing applies force to an object, like the girl pushing the swing in Figure 13.1. The force of the push causes the swing to move. 	combination of all the forces acting on an object	1. c
Force is defined as a push or a pull acting on an object. Examples of forces include friction and gravity. Both are covered in detail later in this chapter. Another example of force is applied force. It occurs when a person or thing applies force to an object, like the girl pushing the swing in Figure 13.1. The force of the push causes the swing to move. 	force that a person or thing exerts on to an object	2. d
Force is defined as a push or a pull acting on an object. Examples of forces include friction and gravity. Both are covered in detail later in this chapter. Another example of force is applied force. It occurs when a person or thing applies force to an object, like the girl pushing the swing in Figure 13.1. The force of the push causes the swing to move. 	push or pull acting on an object	3. a
Two forces may act on an object in the same direction. You can see an example of this in Figure 13.5. After the man on the left lifts up the couch, he will push the couch to the right with a force of 25 newtons. At the same time, the man to the right is pulling the couch to the right with a force of 20 newtons. When two forces act in the same direction, the net force is equal to the sum of the forces. This always results in a stronger force than either of the individual forces alone. In this case, the net force on the couch is 45 newtons to the right, so the couch will move to the right. You Try It! Problem: The boys in the drawing above are about to kick the soccer ball in opposite directions. What will be the net force on the ball? In which direction will the ball move? 	forces that produce a net force of zero	4.g
Force is defined as a push or a pull acting on an object. Examples of forces include friction and gravity. Both are covered in detail later in this chapter. Another example of force is applied force. It occurs when a person or thing applies force to an object, like the girl pushing the swing in Figure 13.1. The force of the push causes the swing to move. 	example of a force	5.f
The SI unit of force is the newton (N). One newton is the amount of force that causes a mass of 1 kilogram to accelerate at 1 m/s2 . Thus, the newton can also be expressed as kgm/s2 . The newton was named for the scientist Sir Isaac Newton, who is famous for his law of gravity. Youll learn more about Sir Isaac Newton later in the chapter. 	si unit for force	6.e
When two forces act on an object in opposite directions, like the book on the table, the net force is equal to the difference between the two forces. In other words, one force is subtracted from the other to calculate the net force. If the opposing forces are equal in strength, the net force is zero. Thats what happens with the book on the table. The upward force minus the downward force equals zero (20 N up - 20 N down = 0 N). Because the forces on the book are balanced, the book remains on the table and doesnt move. In addition to these downward and upward forces, which generally cancel each other out, forces may push or pull an object in other directions. Look at the dogs playing tug-of-war in Figure 13.4. One dog is pulling on the rope with a force of 10 newtons to the left. The other dog is pulling on the rope with a force of 12 newtons to the right. These opposing forces are not equal in strength, so they are unbalanced. When opposing forces are unbalanced, the net force is greater than zero. The net force on the rope is 2 newtons to the right, so the rope will move to the right. 	forces that produce a net force greater than zero	7.b
Sliding friction is friction that acts on objects when they are sliding over a surface. Sliding friction is weaker than static friction. Thats why its easier to slide a piece of furniture over the floor after you start it moving than it is to get it moving in the first place. Sliding friction can be useful. For example, you use sliding friction when you write with a pencil and when you put on your bikes brakes. 	friction is never useful	false
Friction is a force that opposes motion between two surfaces that are touching. Friction can work for or against us. For example, putting sand on an icy sidewalk increases friction so you are less likely to slip. On the other hand, too much friction between moving parts in a car engine can cause the parts to wear out. Other examples of friction are illustrated in Figure 13.7. You can see an animation showing how friction opposes motion at this URL: http://w 	too much friction can cause parts to wear out	true
Sliding friction is friction that acts on objects when they are sliding over a surface. Sliding friction is weaker than static friction. Thats why its easier to slide a piece of furniture over the floor after you start it moving than it is to get it moving in the first place. Sliding friction can be useful. For example, you use sliding friction when you write with a pencil and when you put on your bikes brakes. 	friction can cause scrapes on the skin	true
Friction is a force that opposes motion between two surfaces that are touching. Friction can work for or against us. For example, putting sand on an icy sidewalk increases friction so you are less likely to slip. On the other hand, too much friction between moving parts in a car engine can cause the parts to wear out. Other examples of friction are illustrated in Figure 13.7. You can see an animation showing how friction opposes motion at this URL: http://w 	friction is a force that opposes motion	true
Friction occurs because no surface is perfectly smooth. Even surfaces that look smooth to the unaided eye appear rough or bumpy when viewed under a microscope. Look at the metal surfaces in Figure 13.8. The metal foil is so smooth that it is shiny. However, when highly magnified, the surface of metal appears to be very bumpy. All those mountains and valleys catch and grab the mountains and valleys of any other surface that contacts the metal. This creates friction. 	some surfaces are so smooth that they have no friction	false
Friction is a force that opposes motion between two surfaces that are touching. Friction can work for or against us. For example, putting sand on an icy sidewalk increases friction so you are less likely to slip. On the other hand, too much friction between moving parts in a car engine can cause the parts to wear out. Other examples of friction are illustrated in Figure 13.7. You can see an animation showing how friction opposes motion at this URL: http://w 	the force of friction between surfaces is always useful	false
You know that friction produces heat. Thats why rubbing your hands together makes them warmer. But do you know why the rubbing produces heat? Friction causes the molecules on rubbing surfaces to move faster, so they have more heat energy. Heat from friction can be useful. It not only warms your hands. It also lets you light a match (see Figure 13.10). On the other hand, heat from friction can be a problem inside a car engine. It can cause the car to overheat. To reduce friction, oil is added to the engine. Oil coats the surfaces of moving parts and makes them slippery so there is less friction. 	you use friction when you strike and light a match	true
There are different ways you could move heavy boxes. You could pick them up and carry them. You could slide them across the floor. Or you could put them on a dolly like the one in Figure 13.11 and roll them across the floor. This example illustrates three types of friction: static friction, sliding friction, and rolling friction. Another type of friction is fluid friction. All four types of friction are described below. In each type, friction works opposite the direction of the force applied to a move an object. You can see a video demonstration of the different types of friction at this URL:  (1:07). 	it takes more force to slide than to roll a heavy object	true
Sliding friction is friction that acts on objects when they are sliding over a surface. Sliding friction is weaker than static friction. Thats why its easier to slide a piece of furniture over the floor after you start it moving than it is to get it moving in the first place. Sliding friction can be useful. For example, you use sliding friction when you write with a pencil and when you put on your bikes brakes. 	sliding friction is greater when the sliding object is heavier	true
There are different ways you could move heavy boxes. You could pick them up and carry them. You could slide them across the floor. Or you could put them on a dolly like the one in Figure 13.11 and roll them across the floor. This example illustrates three types of friction: static friction, sliding friction, and rolling friction. Another type of friction is fluid friction. All four types of friction are described below. In each type, friction works opposite the direction of the force applied to a move an object. You can see a video demonstration of the different types of friction at this URL:  (1:07). 	friction works in the same direction as the force applied to move an object	false
Sliding friction is friction that acts on objects when they are sliding over a surface. Sliding friction is weaker than static friction. Thats why its easier to slide a piece of furniture over the floor after you start it moving than it is to get it moving in the first place. Sliding friction can be useful. For example, you use sliding friction when you write with a pencil and when you put on your bikes brakes. 	sliding friction is stronger than static friction	false
Sliding friction is friction that acts on objects when they are sliding over a surface. Sliding friction is weaker than static friction. Thats why its easier to slide a piece of furniture over the floor after you start it moving than it is to get it moving in the first place. Sliding friction can be useful. For example, you use sliding friction when you write with a pencil and when you put on your bikes brakes. 	rolling friction is weaker than sliding friction	true
Rolling friction is friction that acts on objects when they are rolling over a surface. Rolling friction is much weaker than sliding friction or static friction. This explains why it is much easier to move boxes on a wheeled dolly than by carrying or sliding them. It also explains why most forms of ground transportation use wheels, including cars, 4-wheelers, bicycles, roller skates, and skateboards. Ball bearings are another use of rolling friction (see Figure 	when a dolly is stationary there is rolling friction between the wheels and ground	false
Static friction acts on objects when they are resting on a surface. For example, if you are walking on a sidewalk, there is static friction between your shoes and the concrete each time you put down your foot (see Figure 13.12). Without this static friction, your feet would slip out from under you, making it difficult to walk. Static friction also allows you to sit in a chair without sliding to the floor. Can you think of other examples of static friction? 	static friction prevents you from sliding out of your chair to the floor	true
Sliding friction is friction that acts on objects when they are sliding over a surface. Sliding friction is weaker than static friction. Thats why its easier to slide a piece of furniture over the floor after you start it moving than it is to get it moving in the first place. Sliding friction can be useful. For example, you use sliding friction when you write with a pencil and when you put on your bikes brakes. 	the brakes on a bike create rolling friction	false
Rougher surfaces have more friction between them than smoother surfaces. Thats why we put sand on icy sidewalks and roads. The blades of skates are much smoother than the soles of shoes. Thats why you cant slide as far across ice with shoes as you can with skates (see Figure 13.9). The rougher surface of shoes causes more friction and slows you down. Heavier objects also have more friction because they press together with greater force. Did you ever try to push boxes or furniture across the floor? Its harder to overcome friction between heavier objects and the floor than it is between lighter objects and the floor. 	type of friction between ice skates and ice	1.e
Fluid friction is friction that acts on objects that are moving through a fluid. A fluid is a substance that can flow and take the shape of its container. Fluids include liquids and gases. If youve ever tried to push your open hand through the water in a tub or pool, then youve experienced fluid friction between your hand and the water. When a skydiver is falling toward Earth with a parachute, fluid friction between the parachute and the air slows the descent (see Figure 13.14). Fluid pressure with the air is called air resistance. The faster or larger a moving object is, the greater is the fluid friction resisting its motion. The very large surface area of a parachute, for example, has greater air resistance than a skydivers body. 	any substance that can flow and take the shape of its container	2.d
Friction is a force that opposes motion between two surfaces that are touching. Friction can work for or against us. For example, putting sand on an icy sidewalk increases friction so you are less likely to slip. On the other hand, too much friction between moving parts in a car engine can cause the parts to wear out. Other examples of friction are illustrated in Figure 13.7. You can see an animation showing how friction opposes motion at this URL: http://w 	force that opposes motion between any two surfaces	3.a
Static friction acts on objects when they are resting on a surface. For example, if you are walking on a sidewalk, there is static friction between your shoes and the concrete each time you put down your foot (see Figure 13.12). Without this static friction, your feet would slip out from under you, making it difficult to walk. Static friction also allows you to sit in a chair without sliding to the floor. Can you think of other examples of static friction? 	type of friction between shoes and pavement	4.b
There are different ways you could move heavy boxes. You could pick them up and carry them. You could slide them across the floor. Or you could put them on a dolly like the one in Figure 13.11 and roll them across the floor. This example illustrates three types of friction: static friction, sliding friction, and rolling friction. Another type of friction is fluid friction. All four types of friction are described below. In each type, friction works opposite the direction of the force applied to a move an object. You can see a video demonstration of the different types of friction at this URL:  (1:07). 	type of friction between a parachute and air	5.c
Rolling friction is friction that acts on objects when they are rolling over a surface. Rolling friction is much weaker than sliding friction or static friction. This explains why it is much easier to move boxes on a wheeled dolly than by carrying or sliding them. It also explains why most forms of ground transportation use wheels, including cars, 4-wheelers, bicycles, roller skates, and skateboards. Ball bearings are another use of rolling friction (see Figure 	type of friction between roller skates and concrete	6.g
There are different ways you could move heavy boxes. You could pick them up and carry them. You could slide them across the floor. Or you could put them on a dolly like the one in Figure 13.11 and roll them across the floor. This example illustrates three types of friction: static friction, sliding friction, and rolling friction. Another type of friction is fluid friction. All four types of friction are described below. In each type, friction works opposite the direction of the force applied to a move an object. You can see a video demonstration of the different types of friction at this URL:  (1:07). 	type of friction between an object and a gas or liquid	7.f
You are already very familiar with Earths gravity. It constantly pulls you toward the center of the planet. It prevents you and everything else on Earth from being flung out into space as the planet spins on its axis. It also pulls objects above the surface, from meteors to skydivers, down to the ground. Gravity between Earth and the moon and between Earth and artificial satellites keeps all these objects circling around Earth. Gravity also keeps Earth moving around the sun. 	satellites orbit earth because of gravity	true
Weight measures the force of gravity pulling on an object. Because weight measures force, the SI unit for weight is the newton (N). On Earth, a mass of 1 kilogram has a weight of about 10 newtons because of the pull of Earths gravity On the moon, which has less gravity, the same mass would weigh less. Weight is measured with a scale, like the spring scale in Figure 13.16. The scale measures the force with which gravity pulls an object downward. 	an object has a greater mass on earth than it does on the moon	false
Newton was the first one to suggest that gravity is universal and affects all objects in the universe. Thats why his law of gravity is called the law of universal gravitation. Universal gravitation means that the force that causes an apple to fall from a tree to the ground is the same force that causes the moon to keep moving around Earth. Universal gravitation also means that while Earth exerts a pull on you, you exert a pull on Earth. In fact, there is gravity between you and every mass around you  your desk, your book, your pen. Even tiny molecules of gas are attracted to one another by the force of gravity. Newtons law had a huge impact on how people thought about the universe. It explains the motion of objects not only on Earth but in outer space as well. You can learn more about Newtons law of gravity in the video at this URL: 	molecules of gas are attracted toward one another by gravity	true
Regardless of what gravity is  a force between masses or the result of curves in space and time  the effects of gravity on motion are well known. You already know that gravity causes objects to fall down to the ground. Gravity affects the motion of objects in other ways as well. 	all of the solar systems in the universe formed because of gravity	true
Regardless of what gravity is  a force between masses or the result of curves in space and time  the effects of gravity on motion are well known. You already know that gravity causes objects to fall down to the ground. Gravity affects the motion of objects in other ways as well. 	the mass of an object affects its force of gravity	true
Gravity has traditionally been defined as a force of attraction between two masses. According to this conception of gravity, anything that has mass, no matter how small, exerts gravity on other matter. The effect of gravity is that objects exert a pull on other objects. Unlike friction, which acts only between objects that are touching, gravity also acts between objects that are not touching. In fact, gravity can act over very long distances. 	gravity acts only between objects that are close together or touching	false
Regardless of what gravity is  a force between masses or the result of curves in space and time  the effects of gravity on motion are well known. You already know that gravity causes objects to fall down to the ground. Gravity affects the motion of objects in other ways as well. 	objects that are closer together have a weaker force of gravity	false
Regardless of what gravity is  a force between masses or the result of curves in space and time  the effects of gravity on motion are well known. You already know that gravity causes objects to fall down to the ground. Gravity affects the motion of objects in other ways as well. 	all objects have the same acceleration due to gravity	true
Weight measures the force of gravity pulling on an object. Because weight measures force, the SI unit for weight is the newton (N). On Earth, a mass of 1 kilogram has a weight of about 10 newtons because of the pull of Earths gravity On the moon, which has less gravity, the same mass would weigh less. Weight is measured with a scale, like the spring scale in Figure 13.16. The scale measures the force with which gravity pulls an object downward. 	earth has stronger gravity than the moon	true
Earths gravity also affects the acceleration of objects that start out moving horizontally, or parallel to the ground. Look at Figure 13.21. A cannon shoots a cannon ball straight ahead, giving the ball horizontal motion. At the same time, gravity pulls the ball down toward the ground. Both forces acting together cause the ball to move in a curved path. This is called projectile motion. Projectile motion also applies to other moving objects, such as arrows shot from a bow. To hit the bulls eye of a target with an arrow, you actually have to aim for a spot above the bulls eye. Thats because by the time the arrow reaches the target, it has started to curve downward toward the ground. Figure 13.22 shows what happens if you aim at the bulls eye instead of above it. You can access interactive animations of projectile motion at these URLs: http://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulation/projectile-motion http://jersey.uoregon.edu/vlab/ (Select the applet entitled Cannon.) 	the curved path of an arrow is called its orbit	false
Weight measures the force of gravity pulling on an object. Because weight measures force, the SI unit for weight is the newton (N). On Earth, a mass of 1 kilogram has a weight of about 10 newtons because of the pull of Earths gravity On the moon, which has less gravity, the same mass would weigh less. Weight is measured with a scale, like the spring scale in Figure 13.16. The scale measures the force with which gravity pulls an object downward. 	weight is measured with a balance	false
People have known about gravity for thousands of years. After all, they constantly experienced gravity in their daily lives. They knew that things always fall toward the ground. However, it wasnt until Sir Isaac Newton developed his law of gravity in the late 1600s that people really began to understand gravity. Newton is pictured in Figure 13.17. 	people have known about gravity for thousands of years	true
The moon moves around Earth in a circular path called an orbit. Why doesnt Earths gravity pull the moon down to the ground instead? The moon has enough forward velocity to partly counter the force of Earths gravity. It constantly falls toward Earth, but it stays far enough away from Earth so that it actually falls around the planet. As a result, the moon keeps orbiting Earth and never crashes into it. The diagram in Figure 13.23 shows how this happens. You can explore gravity and orbital motion in depth with the animation at this URL: http://phet.colorado You can see an animated version of this diagram at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Orbital_motion.gif . 	the moon has both forward velocity and acceleration toward earth	true
Regardless of what gravity is  a force between masses or the result of curves in space and time  the effects of gravity on motion are well known. You already know that gravity causes objects to fall down to the ground. Gravity affects the motion of objects in other ways as well. 	einsteins theory of gravity is better than newtons law of gravity at predicting how all objects move	true
Gravity has traditionally been defined as a force of attraction between two masses. According to this conception of gravity, anything that has mass, no matter how small, exerts gravity on other matter. The effect of gravity is that objects exert a pull on other objects. Unlike friction, which acts only between objects that are touching, gravity also acts between objects that are not touching. In fact, gravity can act over very long distances. 	einstein defined gravity as a force of attraction between objects with mass	false
Weight measures the force of gravity pulling on an object. Because weight measures force, the SI unit for weight is the newton (N). On Earth, a mass of 1 kilogram has a weight of about 10 newtons because of the pull of Earths gravity On the moon, which has less gravity, the same mass would weigh less. Weight is measured with a scale, like the spring scale in Figure 13.16. The scale measures the force with which gravity pulls an object downward. 	si unit for weight	1.g
Regardless of what gravity is  a force between masses or the result of curves in space and time  the effects of gravity on motion are well known. You already know that gravity causes objects to fall down to the ground. Gravity affects the motion of objects in other ways as well. 	motion of an object subject to horizontal force and the force of gravity	2.e
Gravity has traditionally been defined as a force of attraction between two masses. According to this conception of gravity, anything that has mass, no matter how small, exerts gravity on other matter. The effect of gravity is that objects exert a pull on other objects. Unlike friction, which acts only between objects that are touching, gravity also acts between objects that are not touching. In fact, gravity can act over very long distances. 	force of attraction between two masses	3.a
Regardless of what gravity is  a force between masses or the result of curves in space and time  the effects of gravity on motion are well known. You already know that gravity causes objects to fall down to the ground. Gravity affects the motion of objects in other ways as well. 	scientist who proposed that gravity is due to curves in space and time	4.f
Regardless of what gravity is  a force between masses or the result of curves in space and time  the effects of gravity on motion are well known. You already know that gravity causes objects to fall down to the ground. Gravity affects the motion of objects in other ways as well. 	measure of the force of gravity	5.d
Weight measures the force of gravity pulling on an object. Because weight measures force, the SI unit for weight is the newton (N). On Earth, a mass of 1 kilogram has a weight of about 10 newtons because of the pull of Earths gravity On the moon, which has less gravity, the same mass would weigh less. Weight is measured with a scale, like the spring scale in Figure 13.16. The scale measures the force with which gravity pulls an object downward. 	path of one object around another such as the moon around earth	6.c
Newton was the first one to suggest that gravity is universal and affects all objects in the universe. Thats why his law of gravity is called the law of universal gravitation. Universal gravitation means that the force that causes an apple to fall from a tree to the ground is the same force that causes the moon to keep moving around Earth. Universal gravitation also means that while Earth exerts a pull on you, you exert a pull on Earth. In fact, there is gravity between you and every mass around you  your desk, your book, your pen. Even tiny molecules of gas are attracted to one another by the force of gravity. Newtons law had a huge impact on how people thought about the universe. It explains the motion of objects not only on Earth but in outer space as well. You can learn more about Newtons law of gravity in the video at this URL: 	scientist who proposed the law of universal gravitation	7.b
Something that is elastic can return to its original shape after being stretched or compressed. This property is called elasticity. As you stretch or compress an elastic material, it resists the change in shape. It exerts a counter force in the opposite direction. This force is called elastic force. Elastic force causes the material to spring back to its original shape as soon as the stretching or compressing force is released. You can watch a demonstration of elastic force at this URL:  (3:57). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	force exerted on a material that is pulled apart	1.b
Something that is elastic can return to its original shape after being stretched or compressed. This property is called elasticity. As you stretch or compress an elastic material, it resists the change in shape. It exerts a counter force in the opposite direction. This force is called elastic force. Elastic force causes the material to spring back to its original shape as soon as the stretching or compressing force is released. You can watch a demonstration of elastic force at this URL:  (3:57). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	structure that returns to its original shape after being stretched or compressed	2.e
Something that is elastic can return to its original shape after being stretched or compressed. This property is called elasticity. As you stretch or compress an elastic material, it resists the change in shape. It exerts a counter force in the opposite direction. This force is called elastic force. Elastic force causes the material to spring back to its original shape as soon as the stretching or compressing force is released. You can watch a demonstration of elastic force at this URL:  (3:57). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	force exerted on a material that is pushed together	3.c
Something that is elastic can return to its original shape after being stretched or compressed. This property is called elasticity. As you stretch or compress an elastic material, it resists the change in shape. It exerts a counter force in the opposite direction. This force is called elastic force. Elastic force causes the material to spring back to its original shape as soon as the stretching or compressing force is released. You can watch a demonstration of elastic force at this URL:  (3:57). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	counter force exerted by an elastic material that is stretched or compressed	4.a
Something that is elastic can return to its original shape after being stretched or compressed. This property is called elasticity. As you stretch or compress an elastic material, it resists the change in shape. It exerts a counter force in the opposite direction. This force is called elastic force. Elastic force causes the material to spring back to its original shape as soon as the stretching or compressing force is released. You can watch a demonstration of elastic force at this URL:  (3:57). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	ability of a material to return to its original shape after being stretched or compressed	5.d
Elastic force can be very useful. You probably use it yourself every day. A few common uses of elastic force are pictured in Figure 13.25. Did you ever use a resistance band like the one in the figure? When you pull on the band, it stretches but doesnt break. The resistance you feel when you pull on it is elastic force. The resistance of the band to stretching is what gives your muscles a workout. After you stop pulling on the band, it returns to its original shape, ready for the next workout. Springs like the ones in Figure 13.26 also have elastic force when they are stretched or compressed. And like stretchy materials, they return to their original shape when the stretching or compressing force is released. Because of these properties, springs are used in scales to measure weight. They also cushion the ride in a car and provide springy support beneath a mattress. Can you think of other uses of springs? 	something that is elastic springs back after being stretched	true
Something that is elastic can return to its original shape after being stretched or compressed. This property is called elasticity. As you stretch or compress an elastic material, it resists the change in shape. It exerts a counter force in the opposite direction. This force is called elastic force. Elastic force causes the material to spring back to its original shape as soon as the stretching or compressing force is released. You can watch a demonstration of elastic force at this URL:  (3:57). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	an elastic material resists a change in shape	true
Elastic force can be very useful. You probably use it yourself every day. A few common uses of elastic force are pictured in Figure 13.25. Did you ever use a resistance band like the one in the figure? When you pull on the band, it stretches but doesnt break. The resistance you feel when you pull on it is elastic force. The resistance of the band to stretching is what gives your muscles a workout. After you stop pulling on the band, it returns to its original shape, ready for the next workout. Springs like the ones in Figure 13.26 also have elastic force when they are stretched or compressed. And like stretchy materials, they return to their original shape when the stretching or compressing force is released. Because of these properties, springs are used in scales to measure weight. They also cushion the ride in a car and provide springy support beneath a mattress. Can you think of other uses of springs? 	elastic force is not very useful	false
Elastic force can be very useful. You probably use it yourself every day. A few common uses of elastic force are pictured in Figure 13.25. Did you ever use a resistance band like the one in the figure? When you pull on the band, it stretches but doesnt break. The resistance you feel when you pull on it is elastic force. The resistance of the band to stretching is what gives your muscles a workout. After you stop pulling on the band, it returns to its original shape, ready for the next workout. Springs like the ones in Figure 13.26 also have elastic force when they are stretched or compressed. And like stretchy materials, they return to their original shape when the stretching or compressing force is released. Because of these properties, springs are used in scales to measure weight. They also cushion the ride in a car and provide springy support beneath a mattress. Can you think of other uses of springs? 	when you use a resistance band resistance comes from elastic force	true
Something that is elastic can return to its original shape after being stretched or compressed. This property is called elasticity. As you stretch or compress an elastic material, it resists the change in shape. It exerts a counter force in the opposite direction. This force is called elastic force. Elastic force causes the material to spring back to its original shape as soon as the stretching or compressing force is released. You can watch a demonstration of elastic force at this URL:  (3:57). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	glass is an example of an elastic material	false
Something that is elastic can return to its original shape after being stretched or compressed. This property is called elasticity. As you stretch or compress an elastic material, it resists the change in shape. It exerts a counter force in the opposite direction. This force is called elastic force. Elastic force causes the material to spring back to its original shape as soon as the stretching or compressing force is released. You can watch a demonstration of elastic force at this URL:  (3:57). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	when you compress a spring it resists the change in shape	true
Something that is elastic can return to its original shape after being stretched or compressed. This property is called elasticity. As you stretch or compress an elastic material, it resists the change in shape. It exerts a counter force in the opposite direction. This force is called elastic force. Elastic force causes the material to spring back to its original shape as soon as the stretching or compressing force is released. You can watch a demonstration of elastic force at this URL:  (3:57). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	paper is an example of an elastic material	false
Something that is elastic can return to its original shape after being stretched or compressed. This property is called elasticity. As you stretch or compress an elastic material, it resists the change in shape. It exerts a counter force in the opposite direction. This force is called elastic force. Elastic force causes the material to spring back to its original shape as soon as the stretching or compressing force is released. You can watch a demonstration of elastic force at this URL:  (3:57). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	as you stretch a bungee cord its elastic force gets stronger	true
Something that is elastic can return to its original shape after being stretched or compressed. This property is called elasticity. As you stretch or compress an elastic material, it resists the change in shape. It exerts a counter force in the opposite direction. This force is called elastic force. Elastic force causes the material to spring back to its original shape as soon as the stretching or compressing force is released. You can watch a demonstration of elastic force at this URL:  (3:57). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	when you release a stretched bungee cord it returns to its original shape because of gravity	false
Something that is elastic can return to its original shape after being stretched or compressed. This property is called elasticity. As you stretch or compress an elastic material, it resists the change in shape. It exerts a counter force in the opposite direction. This force is called elastic force. Elastic force causes the material to spring back to its original shape as soon as the stretching or compressing force is released. You can watch a demonstration of elastic force at this URL:  (3:57). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	something that is elastic returns to its original shape after being compressed	true
Newtons first law of motion is also called the law of inertia. Inertia is the tendency of an object to resist a change in its motion. If an object is already at rest, inertia will keep it at rest. If the object is already moving, inertia will keep it moving. Think about what happens when you are riding in a car that stops suddenly. Your body moves forward on the seat. Why? The brakes stop the car but not your body, so your body keeps moving forward because of inertia. Thats why its important to always wear a seat belt. Inertia also explains the amusement park ride in Figure 14.1. The car keeps changing direction, but the riders keep moving in the same direction as before. They slide to the opposite side of the car as a result. You can see an animation of inertia at this URL: 	inertia is the tendency of an object to resist motion	false
Newtons first law of motion is also called the law of inertia. Inertia is the tendency of an object to resist a change in its motion. If an object is already at rest, inertia will keep it at rest. If the object is already moving, inertia will keep it moving. Think about what happens when you are riding in a car that stops suddenly. Your body moves forward on the seat. Why? The brakes stop the car but not your body, so your body keeps moving forward because of inertia. Thats why its important to always wear a seat belt. Inertia also explains the amusement park ride in Figure 14.1. The car keeps changing direction, but the riders keep moving in the same direction as before. They slide to the opposite side of the car as a result. You can see an animation of inertia at this URL: 	newtons first law of motion is also called the law of acceleration	false
The inertia of an object depends on its mass. Objects with greater mass also have greater inertia. Think how hard it would be to push a big box full of books, like the one in Figure 14.3. Then think how easy it would be to push the box if it was empty. The full box is harder to move because it has greater mass and therefore greater inertia. 	if an object is at rest inertia will keep it at rest	true
The inertia of an object depends on its mass. Objects with greater mass also have greater inertia. Think how hard it would be to push a big box full of books, like the one in Figure 14.3. Then think how easy it would be to push the box if it was empty. The full box is harder to move because it has greater mass and therefore greater inertia. 	the inertia of an object is determined by its speed	false
To change the motion of an object, inertia must be overcome by an unbalanced force acting on the object. Until the soccer player kicks the ball in Figure 14.4, the ball remains motionless on the ground. However, when the ball is kicked, the force on it is suddenly unbalanced. The ball starts moving across the field because its inertia has been overcome. 	newtons first law relates motion to balanced and unbalanced forces	true
To change the motion of an object, inertia must be overcome by an unbalanced force acting on the object. Until the soccer player kicks the ball in Figure 14.4, the ball remains motionless on the ground. However, when the ball is kicked, the force on it is suddenly unbalanced. The ball starts moving across the field because its inertia has been overcome. 	the speed of an object changes only when it is acted on by an unbalanced force	true
The inertia of an object depends on its mass. Objects with greater mass also have greater inertia. Think how hard it would be to push a big box full of books, like the one in Figure 14.3. Then think how easy it would be to push the box if it was empty. The full box is harder to move because it has greater mass and therefore greater inertia. 	an object with greater mass has greater inertia	true
The inertia of an object depends on its mass. Objects with greater mass also have greater inertia. Think how hard it would be to push a big box full of books, like the one in Figure 14.3. Then think how easy it would be to push the box if it was empty. The full box is harder to move because it has greater mass and therefore greater inertia. 	a stationary object resists movement only because of gravity	false
The inertia of an object depends on its mass. Objects with greater mass also have greater inertia. Think how hard it would be to push a big box full of books, like the one in Figure 14.3. Then think how easy it would be to push the box if it was empty. The full box is harder to move because it has greater mass and therefore greater inertia. 	balanced forces are needed to change an objects motion	false
The inertia of an object depends on its mass. Objects with greater mass also have greater inertia. Think how hard it would be to push a big box full of books, like the one in Figure 14.3. Then think how easy it would be to push the box if it was empty. The full box is harder to move because it has greater mass and therefore greater inertia. 	the tendency of an object to resist a change in motion depends on its mass	true
To change the motion of an object, inertia must be overcome by an unbalanced force acting on the object. Until the soccer player kicks the ball in Figure 14.4, the ball remains motionless on the ground. However, when the ball is kicked, the force on it is suddenly unbalanced. The ball starts moving across the field because its inertia has been overcome. 	if the net force acting on an object is zero its inertia is also zero	false
Newtons first law of motion states that an objects motion will not change unless an unbalanced force acts on the object. If the object is at rest, it will stay at rest. If the object is in motion, it will stay in motion and its velocity will remain the same. In other words, neither the direction nor the speed of the object will change as long as the net force acting on it is zero. You can watch a video about Newtons first law at this URL: http://videos.howstuffworks.com/ Look at the pool balls in Figure 14.2. When a pool player pushes the pool stick against the white ball, the white ball is set into motion. Once the white ball is rolling, it rolls all the way across the table and stops moving only after it crashes into the cluster of colored balls. Then, the force of the collision starts the colored balls moving. Some may roll until they bounce off the raised sides of the table. Some may fall down into the holes at the edges of the table. None of these motions will occur, however, unless that initial push of the pool stick is applied. As long as the net force on the balls is zero, they will remain at rest. 	a rolling ball will roll forever unless it runs into another object	false
The inertia of an object depends on its mass. Objects with greater mass also have greater inertia. Think how hard it would be to push a big box full of books, like the one in Figure 14.3. Then think how easy it would be to push the box if it was empty. The full box is harder to move because it has greater mass and therefore greater inertia. 	the tendency of an object to resist a change in its motion depends on the objects size	false
To change the motion of an object, inertia must be overcome by an unbalanced force acting on the object. Until the soccer player kicks the ball in Figure 14.4, the ball remains motionless on the ground. However, when the ball is kicked, the force on it is suddenly unbalanced. The ball starts moving across the field because its inertia has been overcome. 	when you are moving at a high rate of speed inertia makes is hard to stop	true
To change the motion of an object, inertia must be overcome by an unbalanced force acting on the object. Until the soccer player kicks the ball in Figure 14.4, the ball remains motionless on the ground. However, when the ball is kicked, the force on it is suddenly unbalanced. The ball starts moving across the field because its inertia has been overcome. 	newtons first law of motion applies only to objects that are already moving	false
To change the motion of an object, inertia must be overcome by an unbalanced force acting on the object. Until the soccer player kicks the ball in Figure 14.4, the ball remains motionless on the ground. However, when the ball is kicked, the force on it is suddenly unbalanced. The ball starts moving across the field because its inertia has been overcome. 	combination of all the forces acting on an object	1.f
To change the motion of an object, inertia must be overcome by an unbalanced force acting on the object. Until the soccer player kicks the ball in Figure 14.4, the ball remains motionless on the ground. However, when the ball is kicked, the force on it is suddenly unbalanced. The ball starts moving across the field because its inertia has been overcome. 	force that opposes the motion of any object	2.c
To change the motion of an object, inertia must be overcome by an unbalanced force acting on the object. Until the soccer player kicks the ball in Figure 14.4, the ball remains motionless on the ground. However, when the ball is kicked, the force on it is suddenly unbalanced. The ball starts moving across the field because its inertia has been overcome. 	an objects motion will not change unless an unbalanced force acts on it	3.d
The inertia of an object depends on its mass. Objects with greater mass also have greater inertia. Think how hard it would be to push a big box full of books, like the one in Figure 14.3. Then think how easy it would be to push the box if it was empty. The full box is harder to move because it has greater mass and therefore greater inertia. 	factor that determines the inertia of an object	4.e
To change the motion of an object, inertia must be overcome by an unbalanced force acting on the object. Until the soccer player kicks the ball in Figure 14.4, the ball remains motionless on the ground. However, when the ball is kicked, the force on it is suddenly unbalanced. The ball starts moving across the field because its inertia has been overcome. 	type of force needed to overcome inertia of an object	5.b
Newtons first law of motion is also called the law of inertia. Inertia is the tendency of an object to resist a change in its motion. If an object is already at rest, inertia will keep it at rest. If the object is already moving, inertia will keep it moving. Think about what happens when you are riding in a car that stops suddenly. Your body moves forward on the seat. Why? The brakes stop the car but not your body, so your body keeps moving forward because of inertia. Thats why its important to always wear a seat belt. Inertia also explains the amusement park ride in Figure 14.1. The car keeps changing direction, but the riders keep moving in the same direction as before. They slide to the opposite side of the car as a result. You can see an animation of inertia at this URL: 	tendency of an object to resist a change in motion	6.a
Newton determined that two factors affect the acceleration of an object: the net force acting on the object and the objects mass. The relationships between these two factors and motion make up Newtons second law of motion. This law states that the acceleration of an object equals the net force acting on the object divided by the objects mass. This can be represented by the equation: Net force , or Mass F a= m Acceleration = You can watch a video about how Newtons second law of motion applies to football at this URL: http://science36 	the relationship between mass and inertia is described by newtons second law of motion	false
Newton determined that two factors affect the acceleration of an object: the net force acting on the object and the objects mass. The relationships between these two factors and motion make up Newtons second law of motion. This law states that the acceleration of an object equals the net force acting on the object divided by the objects mass. This can be represented by the equation: Net force , or Mass F a= m Acceleration = You can watch a video about how Newtons second law of motion applies to football at this URL: http://science36 	newton determined that there is a direct relationship between force and mass	true
Newton determined that two factors affect the acceleration of an object: the net force acting on the object and the objects mass. The relationships between these two factors and motion make up Newtons second law of motion. This law states that the acceleration of an object equals the net force acting on the object divided by the objects mass. This can be represented by the equation: Net force , or Mass F a= m Acceleration = You can watch a video about how Newtons second law of motion applies to football at this URL: http://science36 	any change in velocity for any reason is called acceleration	true
Newtons second law shows that there is a direct relationship between force and acceleration. The greater the force that is applied to an object of a given mass, the more the object will accelerate. For example, doubling the force on the object doubles its acceleration. The relationship between mass and acceleration, on the other hand, is an inverse relationship. The greater the mass of an object, the less it will accelerate when a given force is applied. For example, doubling the mass of an object results in only half as much acceleration for the same amount of force. Consider the example of a batter, like the boy in Figure 14.6. The harder he hits the ball, the greater will be its acceleration. It will travel faster and farther if he hits it with more force. What if the batter hits a baseball and a softball with the same amount of force? The softball will accelerate less than the baseball because the softball has greater mass. As a result, it wont travel as fast or as far as the baseball. 	newtons second law shows that there is a direct relationship between net force and acceleration	true
Newtons second law shows that there is a direct relationship between force and acceleration. The greater the force that is applied to an object of a given mass, the more the object will accelerate. For example, doubling the force on the object doubles its acceleration. The relationship between mass and acceleration, on the other hand, is an inverse relationship. The greater the mass of an object, the less it will accelerate when a given force is applied. For example, doubling the mass of an object results in only half as much acceleration for the same amount of force. Consider the example of a batter, like the boy in Figure 14.6. The harder he hits the ball, the greater will be its acceleration. It will travel faster and farther if he hits it with more force. What if the batter hits a baseball and a softball with the same amount of force? The softball will accelerate less than the baseball because the softball has greater mass. As a result, it wont travel as fast or as far as the baseball. 	the greater the net force applied to a given object the more it will accelerate	true
Newtons second law shows that there is a direct relationship between force and acceleration. The greater the force that is applied to an object of a given mass, the more the object will accelerate. For example, doubling the force on the object doubles its acceleration. The relationship between mass and acceleration, on the other hand, is an inverse relationship. The greater the mass of an object, the less it will accelerate when a given force is applied. For example, doubling the mass of an object results in only half as much acceleration for the same amount of force. Consider the example of a batter, like the boy in Figure 14.6. The harder he hits the ball, the greater will be its acceleration. It will travel faster and farther if he hits it with more force. What if the batter hits a baseball and a softball with the same amount of force? The softball will accelerate less than the baseball because the softball has greater mass. As a result, it wont travel as fast or as far as the baseball. 	doubling the mass of an object doubles its weight	true
Newtons second law shows that there is a direct relationship between force and acceleration. The greater the force that is applied to an object of a given mass, the more the object will accelerate. For example, doubling the force on the object doubles its acceleration. The relationship between mass and acceleration, on the other hand, is an inverse relationship. The greater the mass of an object, the less it will accelerate when a given force is applied. For example, doubling the mass of an object results in only half as much acceleration for the same amount of force. Consider the example of a batter, like the boy in Figure 14.6. The harder he hits the ball, the greater will be its acceleration. It will travel faster and farther if he hits it with more force. What if the batter hits a baseball and a softball with the same amount of force? The softball will accelerate less than the baseball because the softball has greater mass. As a result, it wont travel as fast or as far as the baseball. 	the greater the mass of an object the more it will accelerate when a given net force is applied to it	false
Newton determined that two factors affect the acceleration of an object: the net force acting on the object and the objects mass. The relationships between these two factors and motion make up Newtons second law of motion. This law states that the acceleration of an object equals the net force acting on the object divided by the objects mass. This can be represented by the equation: Net force , or Mass F a= m Acceleration = You can watch a video about how Newtons second law of motion applies to football at this URL: http://science36 	a net force of 1 n applied to a mass of 1 kg results in an acceleration of 05 ms2 	false
Newtons second law of motion explains the weight of objects. Weight is a measure of the force of gravity pulling on an object of a given mass. Its the force (F) in the acceleration equation that was introduced above: a= F m This equation can also be written as: F = ma The acceleration due to gravity of an object equals 9.8 m/s2 , so if you know the mass of an object, you can calculate its weight as: F = m  9.8 m/s2 As this equation shows, weight is directly related to mass. As an objects mass increases, so does its weight. For example, if mass doubles, weight doubles as well. You can learn more about weight and acceleration at this URL: Problem Solving Problem: Daisy has a mass of 35 kilograms. How much does she weigh? Solution: Use the formula: F = m  9.8 m/s2 . F = 35 kg  9.8 m/s2 = 343.0 kg  m/s2 = 343.0 N You Try It! Problem: Daisys dad has a mass is 70 kg, which is twice Daisys mass. Predict how much Daisys dad weighs. Then calculate his weight to see if your prediction is correct. Helpful Hints The equation for calculating weight (F = m  a) works only when the correct units of measurement are used. Mass must be in kilograms (kg). Acceleration must be in m/s2 . Weight (F) is expressed in kgm/s2 or in newtons (N). 	force can be expressed as kg  ms	false
Newton determined that two factors affect the acceleration of an object: the net force acting on the object and the objects mass. The relationships between these two factors and motion make up Newtons second law of motion. This law states that the acceleration of an object equals the net force acting on the object divided by the objects mass. This can be represented by the equation: Net force , or Mass F a= m Acceleration = You can watch a video about how Newtons second law of motion applies to football at this URL: http://science36 	your weight equals your mass multiplied by the acceleration due to gravity	true
Newton determined that two factors affect the acceleration of an object: the net force acting on the object and the objects mass. The relationships between these two factors and motion make up Newtons second law of motion. This law states that the acceleration of an object equals the net force acting on the object divided by the objects mass. This can be represented by the equation: Net force , or Mass F a= m Acceleration = You can watch a video about how Newtons second law of motion applies to football at this URL: http://science36 	any object that is accelerating is changing its speed	false
Newtons second law shows that there is a direct relationship between force and acceleration. The greater the force that is applied to an object of a given mass, the more the object will accelerate. For example, doubling the force on the object doubles its acceleration. The relationship between mass and acceleration, on the other hand, is an inverse relationship. The greater the mass of an object, the less it will accelerate when a given force is applied. For example, doubling the mass of an object results in only half as much acceleration for the same amount of force. Consider the example of a batter, like the boy in Figure 14.6. The harder he hits the ball, the greater will be its acceleration. It will travel faster and farther if he hits it with more force. What if the batter hits a baseball and a softball with the same amount of force? The softball will accelerate less than the baseball because the softball has greater mass. As a result, it wont travel as fast or as far as the baseball. 	if a balanced force acts on an object the object will accelerate	false
Newtons second law shows that there is a direct relationship between force and acceleration. The greater the force that is applied to an object of a given mass, the more the object will accelerate. For example, doubling the force on the object doubles its acceleration. The relationship between mass and acceleration, on the other hand, is an inverse relationship. The greater the mass of an object, the less it will accelerate when a given force is applied. For example, doubling the mass of an object results in only half as much acceleration for the same amount of force. Consider the example of a batter, like the boy in Figure 14.6. The harder he hits the ball, the greater will be its acceleration. It will travel faster and farther if he hits it with more force. What if the batter hits a baseball and a softball with the same amount of force? The softball will accelerate less than the baseball because the softball has greater mass. As a result, it wont travel as fast or as far as the baseball. 	a 10kg object has greater acceleration due to gravity than a 5kg object	false
Newton determined that two factors affect the acceleration of an object: the net force acting on the object and the objects mass. The relationships between these two factors and motion make up Newtons second law of motion. This law states that the acceleration of an object equals the net force acting on the object divided by the objects mass. This can be represented by the equation: Net force , or Mass F a= m Acceleration = You can watch a video about how Newtons second law of motion applies to football at this URL: http://science36 	the acceleration of an object equals its mass times the net force applied to it	false
Newton determined that two factors affect the acceleration of an object: the net force acting on the object and the objects mass. The relationships between these two factors and motion make up Newtons second law of motion. This law states that the acceleration of an object equals the net force acting on the object divided by the objects mass. This can be represented by the equation: Net force , or Mass F a= m Acceleration = You can watch a video about how Newtons second law of motion applies to football at this URL: http://science36 	the acceleration of an object due to gravity depends on the objects initial velocity	false
Newton determined that two factors affect the acceleration of an object: the net force acting on the object and the objects mass. The relationships between these two factors and motion make up Newtons second law of motion. This law states that the acceleration of an object equals the net force acting on the object divided by the objects mass. This can be represented by the equation: Net force , or Mass F a= m Acceleration = You can watch a video about how Newtons second law of motion applies to football at this URL: http://science36 	acceleration due to gravity	1.g
Newtons second law of motion explains the weight of objects. Weight is a measure of the force of gravity pulling on an object of a given mass. Its the force (F) in the acceleration equation that was introduced above: a= F m This equation can also be written as: F = ma The acceleration due to gravity of an object equals 9.8 m/s2 , so if you know the mass of an object, you can calculate its weight as: F = m  9.8 m/s2 As this equation shows, weight is directly related to mass. As an objects mass increases, so does its weight. For example, if mass doubles, weight doubles as well. You can learn more about weight and acceleration at this URL: Problem Solving Problem: Daisy has a mass of 35 kilograms. How much does she weigh? Solution: Use the formula: F = m  9.8 m/s2 . F = 35 kg  9.8 m/s2 = 343.0 kg  m/s2 = 343.0 N You Try It! Problem: Daisys dad has a mass is 70 kg, which is twice Daisys mass. Predict how much Daisys dad weighs. Then calculate his weight to see if your prediction is correct. Helpful Hints The equation for calculating weight (F = m  a) works only when the correct units of measurement are used. Mass must be in kilograms (kg). Acceleration must be in m/s2 . Weight (F) is expressed in kgm/s2 or in newtons (N). 	formula for weight	2.f
Newton determined that two factors affect the acceleration of an object: the net force acting on the object and the objects mass. The relationships between these two factors and motion make up Newtons second law of motion. This law states that the acceleration of an object equals the net force acting on the object divided by the objects mass. This can be represented by the equation: Net force , or Mass F a= m Acceleration = You can watch a video about how Newtons second law of motion applies to football at this URL: http://science36 	formula for acceleration	3.d
Newtons second law of motion explains the weight of objects. Weight is a measure of the force of gravity pulling on an object of a given mass. Its the force (F) in the acceleration equation that was introduced above: a= F m This equation can also be written as: F = ma The acceleration due to gravity of an object equals 9.8 m/s2 , so if you know the mass of an object, you can calculate its weight as: F = m  9.8 m/s2 As this equation shows, weight is directly related to mass. As an objects mass increases, so does its weight. For example, if mass doubles, weight doubles as well. You can learn more about weight and acceleration at this URL: Problem Solving Problem: Daisy has a mass of 35 kilograms. How much does she weigh? Solution: Use the formula: F = m  9.8 m/s2 . F = 35 kg  9.8 m/s2 = 343.0 kg  m/s2 = 343.0 N You Try It! Problem: Daisys dad has a mass is 70 kg, which is twice Daisys mass. Predict how much Daisys dad weighs. Then calculate his weight to see if your prediction is correct. Helpful Hints The equation for calculating weight (F = m  a) works only when the correct units of measurement are used. Mass must be in kilograms (kg). Acceleration must be in m/s2 . Weight (F) is expressed in kgm/s2 or in newtons (N). 	measure of the force of gravity pulling on an object	4.b
Newtons second law shows that there is a direct relationship between force and acceleration. The greater the force that is applied to an object of a given mass, the more the object will accelerate. For example, doubling the force on the object doubles its acceleration. The relationship between mass and acceleration, on the other hand, is an inverse relationship. The greater the mass of an object, the less it will accelerate when a given force is applied. For example, doubling the mass of an object results in only half as much acceleration for the same amount of force. Consider the example of a batter, like the boy in Figure 14.6. The harder he hits the ball, the greater will be its acceleration. It will travel faster and farther if he hits it with more force. What if the batter hits a baseball and a softball with the same amount of force? The softball will accelerate less than the baseball because the softball has greater mass. As a result, it wont travel as fast or as far as the baseball. 	type of relationship between acceleration and mass	5.e
Newton determined that two factors affect the acceleration of an object: the net force acting on the object and the objects mass. The relationships between these two factors and motion make up Newtons second law of motion. This law states that the acceleration of an object equals the net force acting on the object divided by the objects mass. This can be represented by the equation: Net force , or Mass F a= m Acceleration = You can watch a video about how Newtons second law of motion applies to football at this URL: http://science36 	measure of the change in velocity of a moving object	6.a
Newtons second law shows that there is a direct relationship between force and acceleration. The greater the force that is applied to an object of a given mass, the more the object will accelerate. For example, doubling the force on the object doubles its acceleration. The relationship between mass and acceleration, on the other hand, is an inverse relationship. The greater the mass of an object, the less it will accelerate when a given force is applied. For example, doubling the mass of an object results in only half as much acceleration for the same amount of force. Consider the example of a batter, like the boy in Figure 14.6. The harder he hits the ball, the greater will be its acceleration. It will travel faster and farther if he hits it with more force. What if the batter hits a baseball and a softball with the same amount of force? The softball will accelerate less than the baseball because the softball has greater mass. As a result, it wont travel as fast or as far as the baseball. 	type of relationship between acceleration and force	7.c
Newtons third law of motion states that every action has an equal and opposite reaction. This means that forces always act in pairs. First an action occurs, such as the skateboarders pushing together. Then a reaction occurs that is equal in strength to the action but in the opposite direction. In the case of the skateboarders, they move apart, and the distance they move depends on how hard they first pushed together. You can see other examples of actions and reactions in Figure 14.9. You can watch a video about actions and reactions at this URL:  You might think that actions and reactions would cancel each other out like balanced forces do. Balanced forces, which are also equal and opposite, cancel each other out because they act on the same object. Action and reaction forces, in contrast, act on different objects, so they dont cancel each other out and, in fact, often result in motion. For example, in Figure 14.9, the kangaroos action acts on the ground, but the grounds reaction acts on the kangaroo. As a result, the kangaroo jumps away from the ground. One of the action-reaction examples in the Figure 14.9 does not result in motion. Do you know which one it is? 	forces always act in pairs	true
Newtons third law of motion states that every action has an equal and opposite reaction. This means that forces always act in pairs. First an action occurs, such as the skateboarders pushing together. Then a reaction occurs that is equal in strength to the action but in the opposite direction. In the case of the skateboarders, they move apart, and the distance they move depends on how hard they first pushed together. You can see other examples of actions and reactions in Figure 14.9. You can watch a video about actions and reactions at this URL:  You might think that actions and reactions would cancel each other out like balanced forces do. Balanced forces, which are also equal and opposite, cancel each other out because they act on the same object. Action and reaction forces, in contrast, act on different objects, so they dont cancel each other out and, in fact, often result in motion. For example, in Figure 14.9, the kangaroos action acts on the ground, but the grounds reaction acts on the kangaroo. As a result, the kangaroo jumps away from the ground. One of the action-reaction examples in the Figure 14.9 does not result in motion. Do you know which one it is? 	action and reaction forces always cancel out	false
Newtons third law of motion states that every action has an equal and opposite reaction. This means that forces always act in pairs. First an action occurs, such as the skateboarders pushing together. Then a reaction occurs that is equal in strength to the action but in the opposite direction. In the case of the skateboarders, they move apart, and the distance they move depends on how hard they first pushed together. You can see other examples of actions and reactions in Figure 14.9. You can watch a video about actions and reactions at this URL:  You might think that actions and reactions would cancel each other out like balanced forces do. Balanced forces, which are also equal and opposite, cancel each other out because they act on the same object. Action and reaction forces, in contrast, act on different objects, so they dont cancel each other out and, in fact, often result in motion. For example, in Figure 14.9, the kangaroos action acts on the ground, but the grounds reaction acts on the kangaroo. As a result, the kangaroo jumps away from the ground. One of the action-reaction examples in the Figure 14.9 does not result in motion. Do you know which one it is? 	action and reaction forces always result in motion	false
When an action and reaction occur, momentum is transferred from one object to the other. However, the com- bined momentum of the objects remains the same. In other words, momentum is conserved. This is the law of conservation of momentum. Consider the example of a truck colliding with a car, which is illustrated in Figure 14.11. Both vehicles are moving in the same direction before and after the collision, but the truck is moving faster than the car before the collision occurs. During the collision, the truck transfers some of its momentum to the car. After the collision, the truck is moving slower and the car is moving faster than before the collision occurred. Nonetheless, their combined momentum is the same both before and after the collision. You can see an animation showing how momentum is conserved in a head-on collision at this URL:  . 	only moving objects have momentum	true
Momentum can be calculated by multiplying an objects mass in kilograms (kg) by its velocity in meters per second (m/s). For example, assume that a golf ball has a mass of 0.05 kg. If the ball is traveling at a velocity of 50 m/s, its momentum is: Momentum = 0.05 kg  50 m/s = 2.5 kg  m/s Note that the SI unit for momentum is kgm/s. Problem Solving Problem: What is the momentum of a 40-kg child who is running straight ahead with a velocity of 2 m/s? Solution: The child has momentum of: 40 kg  2 m/s = 80 kgm/s. You Try It! Problem: Which football player has greater momentum? Player A: mass = 60 kg; velocity = 2.5 m/s Player B: mass = 65 kg; velocity = 2.0 m/s 	a smaller mass cannot have as much momentum as a larger mass	false
When an action and reaction occur, momentum is transferred from one object to the other. However, the com- bined momentum of the objects remains the same. In other words, momentum is conserved. This is the law of conservation of momentum. Consider the example of a truck colliding with a car, which is illustrated in Figure 14.11. Both vehicles are moving in the same direction before and after the collision, but the truck is moving faster than the car before the collision occurs. During the collision, the truck transfers some of its momentum to the car. After the collision, the truck is moving slower and the car is moving faster than before the collision occurred. Nonetheless, their combined momentum is the same both before and after the collision. You can see an animation showing how momentum is conserved in a head-on collision at this URL:  . 	momentum can be transferred from one object to another	true
When an action and reaction occur, momentum is transferred from one object to the other. However, the com- bined momentum of the objects remains the same. In other words, momentum is conserved. This is the law of conservation of momentum. Consider the example of a truck colliding with a car, which is illustrated in Figure 14.11. Both vehicles are moving in the same direction before and after the collision, but the truck is moving faster than the car before the collision occurs. During the collision, the truck transfers some of its momentum to the car. After the collision, the truck is moving slower and the car is moving faster than before the collision occurred. Nonetheless, their combined momentum is the same both before and after the collision. You can see an animation showing how momentum is conserved in a head-on collision at this URL:  . 	when an action and reaction occur momentum is usually lost	false
When an action and reaction occur, momentum is transferred from one object to the other. However, the com- bined momentum of the objects remains the same. In other words, momentum is conserved. This is the law of conservation of momentum. Consider the example of a truck colliding with a car, which is illustrated in Figure 14.11. Both vehicles are moving in the same direction before and after the collision, but the truck is moving faster than the car before the collision occurs. During the collision, the truck transfers some of its momentum to the car. After the collision, the truck is moving slower and the car is moving faster than before the collision occurred. Nonetheless, their combined momentum is the same both before and after the collision. You can see an animation showing how momentum is conserved in a head-on collision at this URL:  . 	momentum is conserved only in headon collisions	false
Paul Doherty of the Exploratorium performs a "sit-down" lecture on one of Sir Issac Newtons most famous laws. For more information on Newtons laws of motion, see http://science.kqed.org/quest/video/quest-lab-newtons-laws- MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	newtons third law of motion is also called the law of conservation of momentum	false
When an action and reaction occur, momentum is transferred from one object to the other. However, the com- bined momentum of the objects remains the same. In other words, momentum is conserved. This is the law of conservation of momentum. Consider the example of a truck colliding with a car, which is illustrated in Figure 14.11. Both vehicles are moving in the same direction before and after the collision, but the truck is moving faster than the car before the collision occurs. During the collision, the truck transfers some of its momentum to the car. After the collision, the truck is moving slower and the car is moving faster than before the collision occurred. Nonetheless, their combined momentum is the same both before and after the collision. You can see an animation showing how momentum is conserved in a head-on collision at this URL:  . 	momentum is another term for acceleration	false
Momentum can be calculated by multiplying an objects mass in kilograms (kg) by its velocity in meters per second (m/s). For example, assume that a golf ball has a mass of 0.05 kg. If the ball is traveling at a velocity of 50 m/s, its momentum is: Momentum = 0.05 kg  50 m/s = 2.5 kg  m/s Note that the SI unit for momentum is kgm/s. Problem Solving Problem: What is the momentum of a 40-kg child who is running straight ahead with a velocity of 2 m/s? Solution: The child has momentum of: 40 kg  2 m/s = 80 kgm/s. You Try It! Problem: Which football player has greater momentum? Player A: mass = 60 kg; velocity = 2.5 m/s Player B: mass = 65 kg; velocity = 2.0 m/s 	momentum is a measure of an objects velocity	false
What if a friend asked you to play catch with a bowling ball, like the one pictured in Figure 14.10? Hopefully, you would refuse to play! A bowling ball would be too heavy to catch without risk of injury assuming you could even throw it. Thats because a bowling ball has a lot of mass. This gives it a great deal of momentum. Momentum is a property of a moving object that makes the object hard to stop. It equals the objects mass times its velocity. It can be represented by the equation: Momentum = Mass  Velocity This equation shows that momentum is directly related to both mass and velocity. An object has greater momentum if it has greater mass, greater velocity, or both. For example, a bowling ball has greater momentum than a softball when both are moving at the same velocity because the bowling ball has greater mass. However, a softball moving at a very high velocity say, 100 miles an hour would have greater momentum than a slow-rolling bowling ball. If an object isnt moving at all, it has no momentum. Thats because its velocity is zero, and zero times anything is zero. 	if you double the velocity of an object its momentum also doubles	true
When an action and reaction occur, momentum is transferred from one object to the other. However, the com- bined momentum of the objects remains the same. In other words, momentum is conserved. This is the law of conservation of momentum. Consider the example of a truck colliding with a car, which is illustrated in Figure 14.11. Both vehicles are moving in the same direction before and after the collision, but the truck is moving faster than the car before the collision occurs. During the collision, the truck transfers some of its momentum to the car. After the collision, the truck is moving slower and the car is moving faster than before the collision occurred. Nonetheless, their combined momentum is the same both before and after the collision. You can see an animation showing how momentum is conserved in a head-on collision at this URL:  . 	the law of conservation of momentum applies to actions and reactions	true
When an action and reaction occur, momentum is transferred from one object to the other. However, the com- bined momentum of the objects remains the same. In other words, momentum is conserved. This is the law of conservation of momentum. Consider the example of a truck colliding with a car, which is illustrated in Figure 14.11. Both vehicles are moving in the same direction before and after the collision, but the truck is moving faster than the car before the collision occurs. During the collision, the truck transfers some of its momentum to the car. After the collision, the truck is moving slower and the car is moving faster than before the collision occurred. Nonetheless, their combined momentum is the same both before and after the collision. You can see an animation showing how momentum is conserved in a head-on collision at this URL:  . 	after two objects collide their combined momentum is always zero	false
What if a friend asked you to play catch with a bowling ball, like the one pictured in Figure 14.10? Hopefully, you would refuse to play! A bowling ball would be too heavy to catch without risk of injury assuming you could even throw it. Thats because a bowling ball has a lot of mass. This gives it a great deal of momentum. Momentum is a property of a moving object that makes the object hard to stop. It equals the objects mass times its velocity. It can be represented by the equation: Momentum = Mass  Velocity This equation shows that momentum is directly related to both mass and velocity. An object has greater momentum if it has greater mass, greater velocity, or both. For example, a bowling ball has greater momentum than a softball when both are moving at the same velocity because the bowling ball has greater mass. However, a softball moving at a very high velocity say, 100 miles an hour would have greater momentum than a slow-rolling bowling ball. If an object isnt moving at all, it has no momentum. Thats because its velocity is zero, and zero times anything is zero. 	a bowling ball has greater momentum than a softball if both have the same velocity	true
When an action and reaction occur, momentum is transferred from one object to the other. However, the com- bined momentum of the objects remains the same. In other words, momentum is conserved. This is the law of conservation of momentum. Consider the example of a truck colliding with a car, which is illustrated in Figure 14.11. Both vehicles are moving in the same direction before and after the collision, but the truck is moving faster than the car before the collision occurs. During the collision, the truck transfers some of its momentum to the car. After the collision, the truck is moving slower and the car is moving faster than before the collision occurred. Nonetheless, their combined momentum is the same both before and after the collision. You can see an animation showing how momentum is conserved in a head-on collision at this URL:  . 	how to calculate momentum	1.g
Momentum can be calculated by multiplying an objects mass in kilograms (kg) by its velocity in meters per second (m/s). For example, assume that a golf ball has a mass of 0.05 kg. If the ball is traveling at a velocity of 50 m/s, its momentum is: Momentum = 0.05 kg  50 m/s = 2.5 kg  m/s Note that the SI unit for momentum is kgm/s. Problem Solving Problem: What is the momentum of a 40-kg child who is running straight ahead with a velocity of 2 m/s? Solution: The child has momentum of: 40 kg  2 m/s = 80 kgm/s. You Try It! Problem: Which football player has greater momentum? Player A: mass = 60 kg; velocity = 2.5 m/s Player B: mass = 65 kg; velocity = 2.0 m/s 	si unit for momentum	2.d
Newtons third law of motion states that every action has an equal and opposite reaction. This means that forces always act in pairs. First an action occurs, such as the skateboarders pushing together. Then a reaction occurs that is equal in strength to the action but in the opposite direction. In the case of the skateboarders, they move apart, and the distance they move depends on how hard they first pushed together. You can see other examples of actions and reactions in Figure 14.9. You can watch a video about actions and reactions at this URL:  You might think that actions and reactions would cancel each other out like balanced forces do. Balanced forces, which are also equal and opposite, cancel each other out because they act on the same object. Action and reaction forces, in contrast, act on different objects, so they dont cancel each other out and, in fact, often result in motion. For example, in Figure 14.9, the kangaroos action acts on the ground, but the grounds reaction acts on the kangaroo. As a result, the kangaroo jumps away from the ground. One of the action-reaction examples in the Figure 14.9 does not result in motion. Do you know which one it is? 	equal and opposite forces that act on different objects	3.f
When an action and reaction occur, momentum is transferred from one object to the other. However, the com- bined momentum of the objects remains the same. In other words, momentum is conserved. This is the law of conservation of momentum. Consider the example of a truck colliding with a car, which is illustrated in Figure 14.11. Both vehicles are moving in the same direction before and after the collision, but the truck is moving faster than the car before the collision occurs. During the collision, the truck transfers some of its momentum to the car. After the collision, the truck is moving slower and the car is moving faster than before the collision occurred. Nonetheless, their combined momentum is the same both before and after the collision. You can see an animation showing how momentum is conserved in a head-on collision at this URL:  . 	combined momentum of objects remains the same when an actionreaction occurs	4.e
What if a friend asked you to play catch with a bowling ball, like the one pictured in Figure 14.10? Hopefully, you would refuse to play! A bowling ball would be too heavy to catch without risk of injury assuming you could even throw it. Thats because a bowling ball has a lot of mass. This gives it a great deal of momentum. Momentum is a property of a moving object that makes the object hard to stop. It equals the objects mass times its velocity. It can be represented by the equation: Momentum = Mass  Velocity This equation shows that momentum is directly related to both mass and velocity. An object has greater momentum if it has greater mass, greater velocity, or both. For example, a bowling ball has greater momentum than a softball when both are moving at the same velocity because the bowling ball has greater mass. However, a softball moving at a very high velocity say, 100 miles an hour would have greater momentum than a slow-rolling bowling ball. If an object isnt moving at all, it has no momentum. Thats because its velocity is zero, and zero times anything is zero. 	property of a moving object that makes it hard to stop	5.a
Newtons third law of motion states that every action has an equal and opposite reaction. This means that forces always act in pairs. First an action occurs, such as the skateboarders pushing together. Then a reaction occurs that is equal in strength to the action but in the opposite direction. In the case of the skateboarders, they move apart, and the distance they move depends on how hard they first pushed together. You can see other examples of actions and reactions in Figure 14.9. You can watch a video about actions and reactions at this URL:  You might think that actions and reactions would cancel each other out like balanced forces do. Balanced forces, which are also equal and opposite, cancel each other out because they act on the same object. Action and reaction forces, in contrast, act on different objects, so they dont cancel each other out and, in fact, often result in motion. For example, in Figure 14.9, the kangaroos action acts on the ground, but the grounds reaction acts on the kangaroo. As a result, the kangaroo jumps away from the ground. One of the action-reaction examples in the Figure 14.9 does not result in motion. Do you know which one it is? 	equal and opposite forces that act on the same object	6.c
Newtons third law of motion states that every action has an equal and opposite reaction. This means that forces always act in pairs. First an action occurs, such as the skateboarders pushing together. Then a reaction occurs that is equal in strength to the action but in the opposite direction. In the case of the skateboarders, they move apart, and the distance they move depends on how hard they first pushed together. You can see other examples of actions and reactions in Figure 14.9. You can watch a video about actions and reactions at this URL:  You might think that actions and reactions would cancel each other out like balanced forces do. Balanced forces, which are also equal and opposite, cancel each other out because they act on the same object. Action and reaction forces, in contrast, act on different objects, so they dont cancel each other out and, in fact, often result in motion. For example, in Figure 14.9, the kangaroos action acts on the ground, but the grounds reaction acts on the kangaroo. As a result, the kangaroo jumps away from the ground. One of the action-reaction examples in the Figure 14.9 does not result in motion. Do you know which one it is? 	every action has an equal and opposite reaction	7.b
Buoyancy is the ability of a fluid to exert an upward force on any object placed in the fluid. This upward force is called buoyant force. 	only liquids have buoyancy	false
Weight is a measure of the force of gravity pulling down on an object. Buoyant force pushes up on an object. Weight and buoyant force together determine whether an object sinks or floats. This is illustrated in Figure 15.13. If an objects weight is the same as the buoyant force acting on the object, then the object floats. This is the example on the left in Figure 15.13. If an objects weight is greater than the buoyant force acting on the object, then the object sinks. This is the example on the right in Figure 15.13. Because of buoyant force, objects seem lighter in water. You may have noticed this when you went swimming and could easily pick up a friend or sibling under the water. Some of the persons weight was countered by the buoyant force of the water. 	any object sinks if its weight is greater than its volume	false
Buoyancy is the ability of a fluid to exert an upward force on any object placed in the fluid. This upward force is called buoyant force. 	a denser object weighs more than a less dense object of the same size	true
What explains buoyant force? Recall from the earlier lesson "Pressure of Fluids" that a fluid exerts pressure in all directions but the pressure is greater at greater depth. Therefore, the fluid below an object exerts greater force on the object than the fluid above the object. This is illustrated in Figure 15.12. Buoyant force explains why objects may float in water. No doubt youve noticed, however, that some objects do not float in water. If buoyant force applies to all objects in fluids, why do some objects sink instead of float? The answer has to do with their weight. 	helium balloons float in air because helium is purer than air	false
Buoyancy is the ability of a fluid to exert an upward force on any object placed in the fluid. This upward force is called buoyant force. 	the buoyant force acting on an object in a fluid always equals the objects weight	false
Buoyancy is the ability of a fluid to exert an upward force on any object placed in the fluid. This upward force is called buoyant force. 	archimedes determined that the mass of fluid displaced by an object equals the mass of the object	false
Buoyancy is the ability of a fluid to exert an upward force on any object placed in the fluid. This upward force is called buoyant force. 	the more fluid an object displaces the greater the buoyant force acting on the object	true
Buoyancy is the ability of a fluid to exert an upward force on any object placed in the fluid. This upward force is called buoyant force. 	buoyancy is a property of an object that can float in a fluid	false
Buoyancy is the ability of a fluid to exert an upward force on any object placed in the fluid. This upward force is called buoyant force. 	fluids exert pressure only in an upward direction	false
Buoyancy is the ability of a fluid to exert an upward force on any object placed in the fluid. This upward force is called buoyant force. 	buoyant force explains why some objects float in water	true
Buoyancy is the ability of a fluid to exert an upward force on any object placed in the fluid. This upward force is called buoyant force. 	objects float because fluids exert only upward pressure	false
Density, or the amount of mass in a given volume, is also related to buoyancy. Thats because density affects weight. A given volume of a denser substance is heavier than the same volume of a less dense substance. For example, ice is less dense than liquid water. This explains why ice cubes float in a glass of water. This and other examples of density and buoyant force are illustrated in Figure 15.14 and in the video at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	amount of mass in a given volume	1.g
Buoyancy is the ability of a fluid to exert an upward force on any object placed in the fluid. This upward force is called buoyant force. 	buoyancy is a property of some objects when placed in fluids	false
Buoyancy is the ability of a fluid to exert an upward force on any object placed in the fluid. This upward force is called buoyant force. 	force that causes an object to sink in a fluid	2.f
Buoyancy is the ability of a fluid to exert an upward force on any object placed in the fluid. This upward force is called buoyant force. 	to remain at or near the surface of a fluid	3.d
Buoyancy is the ability of a fluid to exert an upward force on any object placed in the fluid. This upward force is called buoyant force. 	if two objects have the same volume but differ in density the denser object will weigh more	true
Buoyancy is the ability of a fluid to exert an upward force on any object placed in the fluid. This upward force is called buoyant force. 	force that causes an object to float on a fluid	4.a
What explains buoyant force? Recall from the earlier lesson "Pressure of Fluids" that a fluid exerts pressure in all directions but the pressure is greater at greater depth. Therefore, the fluid below an object exerts greater force on the object than the fluid above the object. This is illustrated in Figure 15.12. Buoyant force explains why objects may float in water. No doubt youve noticed, however, that some objects do not float in water. If buoyant force applies to all objects in fluids, why do some objects sink instead of float? The answer has to do with their weight. 	archimedes law explains why heavy objects can float if they displace enough water	true
Buoyancy is the ability of a fluid to exert an upward force on any object placed in the fluid. This upward force is called buoyant force. 	the buoyant force acting on an object in a fluid depends on the total volume of the fluid	false
Buoyancy is the ability of a fluid to exert an upward force on any object placed in the fluid. This upward force is called buoyant force. 	act in which an object moves fluid out of its way	5.b
Buoyancy is the ability of a fluid to exert an upward force on any object placed in the fluid. This upward force is called buoyant force. 	ability of a fluid to exert upward force	6.c
Buoyancy is the ability of a fluid to exert an upward force on any object placed in the fluid. This upward force is called buoyant force. 	measure of the force of gravity pulling down on an object	7.e
Sometimes power is measured in a unit called the horsepower. One horsepower is the amount of work a horse can do in 1 minute. It equals 745 watts of power. The horsepower was introduced by James Watt, who invented the first powerful steam engine in the 1770s. Watts steam engine led to a revolution in industry and agriculture because of its power. Watt wanted to impress people with the power of his steam engine, so he compared it with something familiar to people of his time: the power of workhorses, like those pictured in Figure 16.6. Watt said his steam engine could produce the power of 20 horses, or 20 horsepower. The most powerful engines today may produce more than 100,000 horsepower! How many watts of power is that? 	unit for power that equals 745 watts	1.b
The equation for work given above can be used to calculate the amount of work that is done if force and distance are known. For example, assume that one of the weight lifters in Figure 16.2 lifts a weight of 400 newtons over his head to a height of 2.2 meters off the ground. The amount of work he does is: Work = 400 N  2.2 m = 880 N  m Notice that the unit for work is the newton  meter. This is the SI unit for work, also called the joule (J). One joule equals the amount of work that is done when 1 newton of force moves an object over a distance of 1 meter. Problem Solving Problem: Todd pushed a 500 N box 4 meters across the floor. How much work did he do? Solution: Use the equation Work = Force  Distance. Work = 500 N  4 m = 2000 N  m, or 2000 J You Try It! Problem: Lara lifted a 100 N box 1.5 meters above the floor. How much work did she do? 	si unit for work	2.a
Power can be calculated using the formula above, if the amount of work and time are known. For example, assume that a small engine does 3000 joules of work in 2 seconds. Then the power of the motor is: Power = 3000 J = 1500 J/s, or 1500 W 2s You can also calculate work if you know power and time by rewriting the power equation above as: Work = Power  Time For example, if you use a 2000-watt hair dryer for 30 seconds, how much work is done? First express 2000 watts in J/s and then substitute this value for power in the work equation: Work = 2000 J/s  30 s = 60, 000 J For a video presentation on calculating power and work, go to this link:  Problem Solving Problem: An electric mixer does 2500 joules of work in 5 seconds. What is its power? Solution: Use the equation: Power = Work Time . Power = 2500 J = 500 J/s, or 500 W 5s You Try It! Problem: How much work can be done in 30 seconds by a 1000-watt microwave? 	how to calculate work	3.d
Work is directly related to both the force applied to an object and the distance the object moves. It can be represented by the equation: Work = Force  Distance This equation shows that the greater the force that is used to move an object or the farther the object is moved, the more work that is done. You can see a short video introduction to work as the product of force and distance at this link:  . To see the effects of force and distance on work, compare the weight lifters in Figure 16.3. The two weight lifters on the left are lifting the same amount of weight, but the bottom weight lifter is lifting the weight a longer distance. Therefore, this weight lifter is doing more work. The two weight lifters on the bottom right are both lifting the weight the same distance, but the weight lifter on the left is lifting a heavier weight. Therefore, this weight lifter is doing more work. 	use of force to move an object	4.g
Power can be calculated using the formula above, if the amount of work and time are known. For example, assume that a small engine does 3000 joules of work in 2 seconds. Then the power of the motor is: Power = 3000 J = 1500 J/s, or 1500 W 2s You can also calculate work if you know power and time by rewriting the power equation above as: Work = Power  Time For example, if you use a 2000-watt hair dryer for 30 seconds, how much work is done? First express 2000 watts in J/s and then substitute this value for power in the work equation: Work = 2000 J/s  30 s = 60, 000 J For a video presentation on calculating power and work, go to this link:  Problem Solving Problem: An electric mixer does 2500 joules of work in 5 seconds. What is its power? Solution: Use the equation: Power = Work Time . Power = 2500 J = 500 J/s, or 500 W 5s You Try It! Problem: How much work can be done in 30 seconds by a 1000-watt microwave? 	how to calculate power	5.f
The equation for work given above can be used to calculate the amount of work that is done if force and distance are known. For example, assume that one of the weight lifters in Figure 16.2 lifts a weight of 400 newtons over his head to a height of 2.2 meters off the ground. The amount of work he does is: Work = 400 N  2.2 m = 880 N  m Notice that the unit for work is the newton  meter. This is the SI unit for work, also called the joule (J). One joule equals the amount of work that is done when 1 newton of force moves an object over a distance of 1 meter. Problem Solving Problem: Todd pushed a 500 N box 4 meters across the floor. How much work did he do? Solution: Use the equation Work = Force  Distance. Work = 500 N  4 m = 2000 N  m, or 2000 J You Try It! Problem: Lara lifted a 100 N box 1.5 meters above the floor. How much work did she do? 	si unit for power	6.e
Did you ever rake leaves, like the woman in Figure 16.4? It can take a long time to do all that work. But if you use an electric leaf blower, like the man in the figure, the job gets done much sooner. Both the leaf blower and the rake do the work of removing leaves from the yard, but the leaf blower has more power. Thats why it can do the same amount of work in less time. 	measure of the amount of work that can be done in a given amount of time	7. c
Work is directly related to both the force applied to an object and the distance the object moves. It can be represented by the equation: Work = Force  Distance This equation shows that the greater the force that is used to move an object or the farther the object is moved, the more work that is done. You can see a short video introduction to work as the product of force and distance at this link:  . To see the effects of force and distance on work, compare the weight lifters in Figure 16.3. The two weight lifters on the left are lifting the same amount of weight, but the bottom weight lifter is lifting the weight a longer distance. Therefore, this weight lifter is doing more work. The two weight lifters on the bottom right are both lifting the weight the same distance, but the weight lifter on the left is lifting a heavier weight. Therefore, this weight lifter is doing more work. 	every time you apply a force you do work	false
Did you ever rake leaves, like the woman in Figure 16.4? It can take a long time to do all that work. But if you use an electric leaf blower, like the man in the figure, the job gets done much sooner. Both the leaf blower and the rake do the work of removing leaves from the yard, but the leaf blower has more power. Thats why it can do the same amount of work in less time. 	a more powerful device can do more work in the same amount of time than a less powerful device	true
Sometimes power is measured in a unit called the horsepower. One horsepower is the amount of work a horse can do in 1 minute. It equals 745 watts of power. The horsepower was introduced by James Watt, who invented the first powerful steam engine in the 1770s. Watts steam engine led to a revolution in industry and agriculture because of its power. Watt wanted to impress people with the power of his steam engine, so he compared it with something familiar to people of his time: the power of workhorses, like those pictured in Figure 16.6. Watt said his steam engine could produce the power of 20 horses, or 20 horsepower. The most powerful engines today may produce more than 100,000 horsepower! How many watts of power is that? 	the power of a machine equals the work it does multiplied by the time it takes to do that work	false
Sometimes power is measured in a unit called the horsepower. One horsepower is the amount of work a horse can do in 1 minute. It equals 745 watts of power. The horsepower was introduced by James Watt, who invented the first powerful steam engine in the 1770s. Watts steam engine led to a revolution in industry and agriculture because of its power. Watt wanted to impress people with the power of his steam engine, so he compared it with something familiar to people of his time: the power of workhorses, like those pictured in Figure 16.6. Watt said his steam engine could produce the power of 20 horses, or 20 horsepower. The most powerful engines today may produce more than 100,000 horsepower! How many watts of power is that? 	the steam engine invented by james watt had the power of one horse	false
Sometimes power is measured in a unit called the horsepower. One horsepower is the amount of work a horse can do in 1 minute. It equals 745 watts of power. The horsepower was introduced by James Watt, who invented the first powerful steam engine in the 1770s. Watts steam engine led to a revolution in industry and agriculture because of its power. Watt wanted to impress people with the power of his steam engine, so he compared it with something familiar to people of his time: the power of workhorses, like those pictured in Figure 16.6. Watt said his steam engine could produce the power of 20 horses, or 20 horsepower. The most powerful engines today may produce more than 100,000 horsepower! How many watts of power is that? 	the most powerful engines today can produce more than 100000 horsepowers	true
Work is defined differently in physics than in everyday language. In physics, work means the use of force to move an object. The teen who is playing tennis in Figure 16.1 is using force to move her tennis racket, so she is doing work. The teen who is studying isnt moving anything, so she is not doing work. Not all force that is used to move an object does work. For work to be done, the force must be applied in the same direction that the object moves. If a force is applied in a different direction than the object moves, no work is done. Figure 16.2 illustrates this point. The stick person applies an upward force on the box when raising it from the ground to chest height. Work is done because the force is applied in the same direction as the box is moving. However, as the stick person walks from left to right while holding the box at chest height, no more work is done by the persons arms holding the box up. Thats because the force supporting the box acts in a different direction than the box is moving. A small amount of work in the horizontal direction is performed when the person is accelerating during the first step of the walk across the room. But other than that, there is no work, because there is no net force acting on the box horizontally. 	whenever you move your body you are doing work	true
Work is directly related to both the force applied to an object and the distance the object moves. It can be represented by the equation: Work = Force  Distance This equation shows that the greater the force that is used to move an object or the farther the object is moved, the more work that is done. You can see a short video introduction to work as the product of force and distance at this link:  . To see the effects of force and distance on work, compare the weight lifters in Figure 16.3. The two weight lifters on the left are lifting the same amount of weight, but the bottom weight lifter is lifting the weight a longer distance. Therefore, this weight lifter is doing more work. The two weight lifters on the bottom right are both lifting the weight the same distance, but the weight lifter on the left is lifting a heavier weight. Therefore, this weight lifter is doing more work. 	you do work when you push a heavy object even if the object does not move	false
The equation for work given above can be used to calculate the amount of work that is done if force and distance are known. For example, assume that one of the weight lifters in Figure 16.2 lifts a weight of 400 newtons over his head to a height of 2.2 meters off the ground. The amount of work he does is: Work = 400 N  2.2 m = 880 N  m Notice that the unit for work is the newton  meter. This is the SI unit for work, also called the joule (J). One joule equals the amount of work that is done when 1 newton of force moves an object over a distance of 1 meter. Problem Solving Problem: Todd pushed a 500 N box 4 meters across the floor. How much work did he do? Solution: Use the equation Work = Force  Distance. Work = 500 N  4 m = 2000 N  m, or 2000 J You Try It! Problem: Lara lifted a 100 N box 1.5 meters above the floor. How much work did she do? 	work can be expressed in the unit n  m	true
Power is a measure of the amount of work that can be done in a given amount of time. Power can be represented by the equation: Power = Work Time In this equation, work is measured in joules and time is measured in seconds, so power is expressed in joules per second (J/s). This is the SI unit for work, also known as the watt (W). A watt equals 1 joule of work per second. The watt is named for James Watt, a Scottish inventor you will read about below. You may already be familiar with watts. Thats because light bulbs and small appliances such as hair dryers are labeled with the watts of power they provide. For example, the hair dryer in Figure 16.5 is labeled "2000 watts." This amount of power could also be expressed kilowatts. A kilowatt equals 1000 watts, so the 2000-watt hair dryer produces 2 kilowatts of power. Compared with a less powerful device, a more powerful device can either do more work in the same time or do the same work in less time. For example, compared with a low-power microwave, a high-power microwave can cook more food in the same time or the same amount of food in less time. 	a more powerful device can do the same work in less time than a less powerful device	true
The equation for work given above can be used to calculate the amount of work that is done if force and distance are known. For example, assume that one of the weight lifters in Figure 16.2 lifts a weight of 400 newtons over his head to a height of 2.2 meters off the ground. The amount of work he does is: Work = 400 N  2.2 m = 880 N  m Notice that the unit for work is the newton  meter. This is the SI unit for work, also called the joule (J). One joule equals the amount of work that is done when 1 newton of force moves an object over a distance of 1 meter. Problem Solving Problem: Todd pushed a 500 N box 4 meters across the floor. How much work did he do? Solution: Use the equation Work = Force  Distance. Work = 500 N  4 m = 2000 N  m, or 2000 J You Try It! Problem: Lara lifted a 100 N box 1.5 meters above the floor. How much work did she do? 	if you move an object that weighs 10 newtons a distance of 2 meters you do 5 joules of work	false
The equation for work given above can be used to calculate the amount of work that is done if force and distance are known. For example, assume that one of the weight lifters in Figure 16.2 lifts a weight of 400 newtons over his head to a height of 2.2 meters off the ground. The amount of work he does is: Work = 400 N  2.2 m = 880 N  m Notice that the unit for work is the newton  meter. This is the SI unit for work, also called the joule (J). One joule equals the amount of work that is done when 1 newton of force moves an object over a distance of 1 meter. Problem Solving Problem: Todd pushed a 500 N box 4 meters across the floor. How much work did he do? Solution: Use the equation Work = Force  Distance. Work = 500 N  4 m = 2000 N  m, or 2000 J You Try It! Problem: Lara lifted a 100 N box 1.5 meters above the floor. How much work did she do? 	if you move the object in question 5 a distance of 5 meters you do 2 joules of work	false
Power is a measure of the amount of work that can be done in a given amount of time. Power can be represented by the equation: Power = Work Time In this equation, work is measured in joules and time is measured in seconds, so power is expressed in joules per second (J/s). This is the SI unit for work, also known as the watt (W). A watt equals 1 joule of work per second. The watt is named for James Watt, a Scottish inventor you will read about below. You may already be familiar with watts. Thats because light bulbs and small appliances such as hair dryers are labeled with the watts of power they provide. For example, the hair dryer in Figure 16.5 is labeled "2000 watts." This amount of power could also be expressed kilowatts. A kilowatt equals 1000 watts, so the 2000-watt hair dryer produces 2 kilowatts of power. Compared with a less powerful device, a more powerful device can either do more work in the same time or do the same work in less time. For example, compared with a low-power microwave, a high-power microwave can cook more food in the same time or the same amount of food in less time. 	a device that does 100 joules of work in 3 seconds has 300 watts of power	false
Sometimes power is measured in a unit called the horsepower. One horsepower is the amount of work a horse can do in 1 minute. It equals 745 watts of power. The horsepower was introduced by James Watt, who invented the first powerful steam engine in the 1770s. Watts steam engine led to a revolution in industry and agriculture because of its power. Watt wanted to impress people with the power of his steam engine, so he compared it with something familiar to people of his time: the power of workhorses, like those pictured in Figure 16.6. Watt said his steam engine could produce the power of 20 horses, or 20 horsepower. The most powerful engines today may produce more than 100,000 horsepower! How many watts of power is that? 	the unit called the horsepower was introduced by james watt	true
Power can be calculated using the formula above, if the amount of work and time are known. For example, assume that a small engine does 3000 joules of work in 2 seconds. Then the power of the motor is: Power = 3000 J = 1500 J/s, or 1500 W 2s You can also calculate work if you know power and time by rewriting the power equation above as: Work = Power  Time For example, if you use a 2000-watt hair dryer for 30 seconds, how much work is done? First express 2000 watts in J/s and then substitute this value for power in the work equation: Work = 2000 J/s  30 s = 60, 000 J For a video presentation on calculating power and work, go to this link:  Problem Solving Problem: An electric mixer does 2500 joules of work in 5 seconds. What is its power? Solution: Use the equation: Power = Work Time . Power = 2500 J = 500 J/s, or 500 W 5s You Try It! Problem: How much work can be done in 30 seconds by a 1000-watt microwave? 	a 2horsepower device has almost 1500 watts of power	true
Work is directly related to both the force applied to an object and the distance the object moves. It can be represented by the equation: Work = Force  Distance This equation shows that the greater the force that is used to move an object or the farther the object is moved, the more work that is done. You can see a short video introduction to work as the product of force and distance at this link:  . To see the effects of force and distance on work, compare the weight lifters in Figure 16.3. The two weight lifters on the left are lifting the same amount of weight, but the bottom weight lifter is lifting the weight a longer distance. Therefore, this weight lifter is doing more work. The two weight lifters on the bottom right are both lifting the weight the same distance, but the weight lifter on the left is lifting a heavier weight. Therefore, this weight lifter is doing more work. 	the more force you apply to move an object the more work you do	true
As you read above, some machines increase the force put into the machine, while other machines increase the distance over which the force is applied. Still other machines change only the direction of the force. Which way a machine works affects its mechanical advantage. For machines that increase force including ramps, doorknobs, and nutcrackers the output force is greater than the input force. Therefore, the mechanical advantage is greater than 1. For machines that increase the distance over which force is applied, such as paddles and hammers, the output force is less than the input force. Therefore, the mechanical advantage is less than 1. For machines that change only the direction of the force, such as the rope systems on flagpoles, the output force is the same as the input force. Therefore, the mechanical advantage is equal to 1. 	the output distance of a machine is always greater than the input distance	false
Examples of machines that increase the distance over which force is applied are paddles and hammers. Figure 16.9 explains how these machines work. In each case, the machine increases the distance over which the force is applied, but it reduces the strength of the applied force. 	using a machine increases the amount of work that is done for a given amount of force	false
Examples of machines that increase the distance over which force is applied are paddles and hammers. Figure 16.9 explains how these machines work. In each case, the machine increases the distance over which the force is applied, but it reduces the strength of the applied force. 	a machine increases the applied force by increasing the distance over which the force is applied	false
Another measure of the effectiveness of a machine is its mechanical advantage. Mechanical advantage is the number of times a machine multiplies the input force. It can be calculated with the equation: Mechanical Advantage = Output force Input force This equation computes the actual mechanical advantage of a machine. It takes into account the reduction in output force that is due to friction. It shows how much a machine actually multiplies force when it used in the real world. 	the output force of a machine is always less than the input force	false
Examples of machines that increase force are doorknobs and nutcrackers. Figure 16.8 explains how these machines work. In each case, the force applied by the user is less than the force applied by the machine, but the machine applies the force over a shorter distance. 	the force you apply to a doorknob is less than the force applied by the doorknob to open the door	true
Examples of machines that increase the distance over which force is applied are paddles and hammers. Figure 16.9 explains how these machines work. In each case, the machine increases the distance over which the force is applied, but it reduces the strength of the applied force. 	all machines that change the strength of the force also change the distance over which the force is applied	true
Examples of machines that increase force are doorknobs and nutcrackers. Figure 16.8 explains how these machines work. In each case, the force applied by the user is less than the force applied by the machine, but the machine applies the force over a shorter distance. 	a machine changes the way that work is done	true
Another measure of the effectiveness of a machine is its mechanical advantage. Mechanical advantage is the number of times a machine multiplies the input force. It can be calculated with the equation: Mechanical Advantage = Output force Input force This equation computes the actual mechanical advantage of a machine. It takes into account the reduction in output force that is due to friction. It shows how much a machine actually multiplies force when it used in the real world. 	the actual mechanical advantage of a machine is always greater than its ideal mechanical advantage	false
Examples of machines that increase force are doorknobs and nutcrackers. Figure 16.8 explains how these machines work. In each case, the force applied by the user is less than the force applied by the machine, but the machine applies the force over a shorter distance. 	all machines change the direction in which force is applied	false
Examples of machines that increase the distance over which force is applied are paddles and hammers. Figure 16.9 explains how these machines work. In each case, the machine increases the distance over which the force is applied, but it reduces the strength of the applied force. 	a machine that applies force over a longer distance also increases the strength of the force	false
As you read above, some machines increase the force put into the machine, while other machines increase the distance over which the force is applied. Still other machines change only the direction of the force. Which way a machine works affects its mechanical advantage. For machines that increase force including ramps, doorknobs, and nutcrackers the output force is greater than the input force. Therefore, the mechanical advantage is greater than 1. For machines that increase the distance over which force is applied, such as paddles and hammers, the output force is less than the input force. Therefore, the mechanical advantage is less than 1. For machines that change only the direction of the force, such as the rope systems on flagpoles, the output force is the same as the input force. Therefore, the mechanical advantage is equal to 1. 	if a machines output distance is greater than the input distance the ideal mechanical advantage is less than	true
Examples of machines that increase the distance over which force is applied are paddles and hammers. Figure 16.9 explains how these machines work. In each case, the machine increases the distance over which the force is applied, but it reduces the strength of the applied force. 	a pry bar changes the strength distance and direction of the input force	true
As you read above, some machines increase the force put into the machine, while other machines increase the distance over which the force is applied. Still other machines change only the direction of the force. Which way a machine works affects its mechanical advantage. For machines that increase force including ramps, doorknobs, and nutcrackers the output force is greater than the input force. Therefore, the mechanical advantage is greater than 1. For machines that increase the distance over which force is applied, such as paddles and hammers, the output force is less than the input force. Therefore, the mechanical advantage is less than 1. For machines that change only the direction of the force, such as the rope systems on flagpoles, the output force is the same as the input force. Therefore, the mechanical advantage is equal to 1. 	if a machine changes only the direction of force its mechanical advantage is equal to 1	true
Examples of machines that increase force are doorknobs and nutcrackers. Figure 16.8 explains how these machines work. In each case, the force applied by the user is less than the force applied by the machine, but the machine applies the force over a shorter distance. 	a lever is a machine that changes the direction of the force that is applied to it	false
Another measure of the effectiveness of a machine is its mechanical advantage. Mechanical advantage is the number of times a machine multiplies the input force. It can be calculated with the equation: Mechanical Advantage = Output force Input force This equation computes the actual mechanical advantage of a machine. It takes into account the reduction in output force that is due to friction. It shows how much a machine actually multiplies force when it used in the real world. 	number of times a machine multiplies the input force	1.d
Examples of machines that increase force are doorknobs and nutcrackers. Figure 16.8 explains how these machines work. In each case, the force applied by the user is less than the force applied by the machine, but the machine applies the force over a shorter distance. 	distance over which force is applied to a machine	2.e
You read above that machines do not increase the work done on an object. In other words, you cant get more work out of a machine than you put into it. In fact, machines always do less work on the object than the user does on the machine. Thats because all machines must use some of the work put into them to overcome friction. How much work? It depends on the efficiency of the machine. Efficiency is the percent of input work that becomes output work. It is a measure of how well a machine reduces friction. 	percent of input work that becomes output work	3.a
Examples of machines that increase force are doorknobs and nutcrackers. Figure 16.8 explains how these machines work. In each case, the force applied by the user is less than the force applied by the machine, but the machine applies the force over a shorter distance. 	force applied to a machine	4.b
A machine is any device that makes work easier by changing a force. When you use a machine, you apply force to the machine. This force is called the input force. The machine, in turn, applies force to an object. This force is called the output force. Recall that work equals force multiplied by distance: Work = Force  Distance The force you apply to a machine is applied over a given distance, called the input distance. The force applied by the machine to the object is also applied over a distance, called the output distance. The output distance may or may not be the same as the input distance. Machines make work easier by increasing the amount of force that is applied, increasing the distance over which the force is applied, or changing the direction in which the force is applied. Contrary to popular belief, machines do not increase the amount of work that is done. They just change how the work is done. So if a machine increases the force applied, it must apply the force over a shorter distance. Similarly, if a machine increases the distance over which the force is applied, it must apply less force. 	any device that makes work easier by changing a force	5.g
Examples of machines that increase force are doorknobs and nutcrackers. Figure 16.8 explains how these machines work. In each case, the force applied by the user is less than the force applied by the machine, but the machine applies the force over a shorter distance. 	distance over which a machine applies force	6.f
Examples of machines that increase force are doorknobs and nutcrackers. Figure 16.8 explains how these machines work. In each case, the force applied by the user is less than the force applied by the machine, but the machine applies the force over a shorter distance. 	force applied by a machine	7.c
Two simple machines that are based on the inclined plane are the wedge and the screw. Both increase the force used to move an object because the input force is applied over a greater distance than the output force. 	there are seven different types of simple machines	false
Two simple machines that are based on the inclined plane are the wedge and the screw. Both increase the force used to move an object because the input force is applied over a greater distance than the output force. 	the input distance of an inclined plane is always greater than the output distance	true
Two simple machines that are based on the inclined plane are the wedge and the screw. Both increase the force used to move an object because the input force is applied over a greater distance than the output force. 	the input force is always applied to the thinner side of a wedge	false
Did you ever ride on a Ferris wheel, like the one pictured in Figure 16.20? If you did, then you know how thrilling the ride can be. A Ferris wheel is an example of a wheel and axle. A wheel and axle is a simple machine that consists of two connected rings or cylinders, one inside the other, which both turn in the same direction around a single center point. The smaller, inner ring or cylinder is called the axle. The bigger, outer ring or cylinder is called the wheel. The car steering wheel in Figure 16.20 is another example of a wheel and axle. In a wheel and axle, force may be applied either to the wheel or to the axle. In both cases, the direction of the force does not change, but the force is either increased or applied over a greater distance. When the input force is applied to the axle, as it is with a Ferris wheel, the wheel turns with less force, so the ideal mechanical advantage is less than 1. However, the wheel turns over a greater distance, so it turns faster than the axle. The speed of the wheel is one reason that the Ferris wheel ride is so exciting. When the input force is applied to the wheel, as it is with a steering wheel, the axle turns over a shorter distance but with greater force, so the ideal mechanical advantage is greater than 1. This allows you to turn the steering wheel with relatively little effort, while the axle of the steering wheel applies enough force to turn the car. 	the center of a wheel and axle is called the fulcrum	false
Two simple machines that are based on the inclined plane are the wedge and the screw. Both increase the force used to move an object because the input force is applied over a greater distance than the output force. 	the closer together the threads of a screw are the harder it is to turn the screw	false
Two simple machines that are based on the inclined plane are the wedge and the screw. Both increase the force used to move an object because the input force is applied over a greater distance than the output force. 	a wedge is used to cut or split objects	true
Did you ever use a hammer to pull a nail out of a board? If not, you can see how its done in Figure 16.18. When you pull down on the handle of the hammer, the claw end pulls up on the nail. A hammer is an example of a lever. A lever is a simple machine consisting of a bar that rotates around a fixed point called the fulcrum. For a video introduction to levers using skateboards as examples, go to this link:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  A lever may or may not increase the force applied, and it may or may not change the direction of the force. It all depends on the location of the input and output forces relative to the fulcrum. In this regard, there are three basic types of levers, called first-class, second-class, and third-class levers. Figure 16.19 describes the three classes. 	when you use a hammer to pry a nail out of board the hammer is a first class lever	true
You may be wondering why you would use a third-class lever when it doesnt change the direction or strength of the applied force. The advantage of a third-class lever is that the output force is applied over a greater distance than the input force. This means that the output end of the lever must move faster than the input end. Why would this be useful when you are moving a hockey stick or baseball bat, both of which are third-class levers? 	a lever always increases the force applied to the lever	false
Two simple machines that are based on the inclined plane are the wedge and the screw. Both increase the force used to move an object because the input force is applied over a greater distance than the output force. 	when you turn a screw you apply force along its inclined plane	true
Did you ever ride on a Ferris wheel, like the one pictured in Figure 16.20? If you did, then you know how thrilling the ride can be. A Ferris wheel is an example of a wheel and axle. A wheel and axle is a simple machine that consists of two connected rings or cylinders, one inside the other, which both turn in the same direction around a single center point. The smaller, inner ring or cylinder is called the axle. The bigger, outer ring or cylinder is called the wheel. The car steering wheel in Figure 16.20 is another example of a wheel and axle. In a wheel and axle, force may be applied either to the wheel or to the axle. In both cases, the direction of the force does not change, but the force is either increased or applied over a greater distance. When the input force is applied to the axle, as it is with a Ferris wheel, the wheel turns with less force, so the ideal mechanical advantage is less than 1. However, the wheel turns over a greater distance, so it turns faster than the axle. The speed of the wheel is one reason that the Ferris wheel ride is so exciting. When the input force is applied to the wheel, as it is with a steering wheel, the axle turns over a shorter distance but with greater force, so the ideal mechanical advantage is greater than 1. This allows you to turn the steering wheel with relatively little effort, while the axle of the steering wheel applies enough force to turn the car. 	the wheel of a ferris wheel turns more quickly than the axle	true
You may be wondering why you would use a third-class lever when it doesnt change the direction or strength of the applied force. The advantage of a third-class lever is that the output force is applied over a greater distance than the input force. This means that the output end of the lever must move faster than the input end. Why would this be useful when you are moving a hockey stick or baseball bat, both of which are third-class levers? 	a lever may or may not change the strength of the applied force	true
Did you ever ride on a Ferris wheel, like the one pictured in Figure 16.20? If you did, then you know how thrilling the ride can be. A Ferris wheel is an example of a wheel and axle. A wheel and axle is a simple machine that consists of two connected rings or cylinders, one inside the other, which both turn in the same direction around a single center point. The smaller, inner ring or cylinder is called the axle. The bigger, outer ring or cylinder is called the wheel. The car steering wheel in Figure 16.20 is another example of a wheel and axle. In a wheel and axle, force may be applied either to the wheel or to the axle. In both cases, the direction of the force does not change, but the force is either increased or applied over a greater distance. When the input force is applied to the axle, as it is with a Ferris wheel, the wheel turns with less force, so the ideal mechanical advantage is less than 1. However, the wheel turns over a greater distance, so it turns faster than the axle. The speed of the wheel is one reason that the Ferris wheel ride is so exciting. When the input force is applied to the wheel, as it is with a steering wheel, the axle turns over a shorter distance but with greater force, so the ideal mechanical advantage is greater than 1. This allows you to turn the steering wheel with relatively little effort, while the axle of the steering wheel applies enough force to turn the car. 	the wheel of a wheel and axle turns more slowly than the axle	false
All three classes of levers make work easier, but they do so in different ways. When the input and output forces are on opposite sides of the fulcrum, the lever changes the direction of the applied force. This occurs only with a first-class lever. When both the input and output forces are on the same side of the fulcrum, the direction of the applied force does not change. This occurs with both second- and third-class levers. When the input force is applied farther from the fulcrum, the input distance is greater than the output distance, so the ideal mechanical advantage is greater than 1. This always occurs with second-class levers and may occur with first-class levers. When the input force is applied closer to the fulcrum, the input distance is less than the output distance, so the ideal mechanical advantage is less than 1. This always occurs with third-class levers and may occur with first-class levers. When both forces are the same distance from the fulcrum, the input distance equals the output distance, so the ideal mechanical advantage equals 1. This occurs only with first class-levers. 	a single fixed pulley has an ideal mechanical advantage of 1	true
Another simple machine that uses a wheel is the pulley. A pulley is a simple machine that consists of a rope and grooved wheel. The rope fits into the groove in the wheel, and pulling on the rope turns the wheel. Figure 16.21 shows two common uses of pulleys. Some pulleys are attached to a beam or other secure surface and remain fixed in place. They are called fixed pulleys. Other pulleys are attached to the object being moved and are moveable themselves. They are called moveable pulleys. Sometimes, fixed and moveable pulleys are used together. They make up a compound pulley. The three types of pulleys are compared in Figure 16.22. In all three types, the ideal mechanical advantage is equal to the number of rope segments pulling up on the object. The more rope segments that are helping to do the lifting work, the less force that is needed for the job. You can experiment with an interactive animation of compound pulleys with various numbers of pulleys at this link:  . In a single fixed pulley, only one rope segment lifts the object, so the ideal mechanical advantage is 1. This type of pulley doesnt increase the force, but it does change the direction of the force. This allows you to use your weight to pull on one end of the rope and more easily raise the object attached to the other end. In a single moveable pulley, two rope segments lift the object, so the ideal mechanical advantage is 2. This type of pulley doesnt change the direction of the force, but it does increase the force. In a compound pulley, two or more rope segments lift the object, so the ideal mechanical advantage is equal to or greater than 2. This type of pulley may or may not change the direction of the force, depending on the number and arrangement of pulleys. When several pulleys are combined, the increase in force may be very great. To learn more about the mechanical advantage of different types of pulleys, watch the video at this link: http://video 	a compound pulley always contains at least two fixed pulleys	false
Another simple machine that uses a wheel is the pulley. A pulley is a simple machine that consists of a rope and grooved wheel. The rope fits into the groove in the wheel, and pulling on the rope turns the wheel. Figure 16.21 shows two common uses of pulleys. Some pulleys are attached to a beam or other secure surface and remain fixed in place. They are called fixed pulleys. Other pulleys are attached to the object being moved and are moveable themselves. They are called moveable pulleys. Sometimes, fixed and moveable pulleys are used together. They make up a compound pulley. The three types of pulleys are compared in Figure 16.22. In all three types, the ideal mechanical advantage is equal to the number of rope segments pulling up on the object. The more rope segments that are helping to do the lifting work, the less force that is needed for the job. You can experiment with an interactive animation of compound pulleys with various numbers of pulleys at this link:  . In a single fixed pulley, only one rope segment lifts the object, so the ideal mechanical advantage is 1. This type of pulley doesnt increase the force, but it does change the direction of the force. This allows you to use your weight to pull on one end of the rope and more easily raise the object attached to the other end. In a single moveable pulley, two rope segments lift the object, so the ideal mechanical advantage is 2. This type of pulley doesnt change the direction of the force, but it does increase the force. In a compound pulley, two or more rope segments lift the object, so the ideal mechanical advantage is equal to or greater than 2. This type of pulley may or may not change the direction of the force, depending on the number and arrangement of pulleys. When several pulleys are combined, the increase in force may be very great. To learn more about the mechanical advantage of different types of pulleys, watch the video at this link: http://video 	a zipline pulley is an example of a single moveable pulley	true
Did you ever ride on a Ferris wheel, like the one pictured in Figure 16.20? If you did, then you know how thrilling the ride can be. A Ferris wheel is an example of a wheel and axle. A wheel and axle is a simple machine that consists of two connected rings or cylinders, one inside the other, which both turn in the same direction around a single center point. The smaller, inner ring or cylinder is called the axle. The bigger, outer ring or cylinder is called the wheel. The car steering wheel in Figure 16.20 is another example of a wheel and axle. In a wheel and axle, force may be applied either to the wheel or to the axle. In both cases, the direction of the force does not change, but the force is either increased or applied over a greater distance. When the input force is applied to the axle, as it is with a Ferris wheel, the wheel turns with less force, so the ideal mechanical advantage is less than 1. However, the wheel turns over a greater distance, so it turns faster than the axle. The speed of the wheel is one reason that the Ferris wheel ride is so exciting. When the input force is applied to the wheel, as it is with a steering wheel, the axle turns over a shorter distance but with greater force, so the ideal mechanical advantage is greater than 1. This allows you to turn the steering wheel with relatively little effort, while the axle of the steering wheel applies enough force to turn the car. 	simple machine that consists of a rope and grooved wheel	1.c
All three classes of levers make work easier, but they do so in different ways. When the input and output forces are on opposite sides of the fulcrum, the lever changes the direction of the applied force. This occurs only with a first-class lever. When both the input and output forces are on the same side of the fulcrum, the direction of the applied force does not change. This occurs with both second- and third-class levers. When the input force is applied farther from the fulcrum, the input distance is greater than the output distance, so the ideal mechanical advantage is greater than 1. This always occurs with second-class levers and may occur with first-class levers. When the input force is applied closer to the fulcrum, the input distance is less than the output distance, so the ideal mechanical advantage is less than 1. This always occurs with third-class levers and may occur with first-class levers. When both forces are the same distance from the fulcrum, the input distance equals the output distance, so the ideal mechanical advantage equals 1. This occurs only with first class-levers. 	type of lever in which the fulcrum is between the input and output forces	2.e
Did you ever ride on a Ferris wheel, like the one pictured in Figure 16.20? If you did, then you know how thrilling the ride can be. A Ferris wheel is an example of a wheel and axle. A wheel and axle is a simple machine that consists of two connected rings or cylinders, one inside the other, which both turn in the same direction around a single center point. The smaller, inner ring or cylinder is called the axle. The bigger, outer ring or cylinder is called the wheel. The car steering wheel in Figure 16.20 is another example of a wheel and axle. In a wheel and axle, force may be applied either to the wheel or to the axle. In both cases, the direction of the force does not change, but the force is either increased or applied over a greater distance. When the input force is applied to the axle, as it is with a Ferris wheel, the wheel turns with less force, so the ideal mechanical advantage is less than 1. However, the wheel turns over a greater distance, so it turns faster than the axle. The speed of the wheel is one reason that the Ferris wheel ride is so exciting. When the input force is applied to the wheel, as it is with a steering wheel, the axle turns over a shorter distance but with greater force, so the ideal mechanical advantage is greater than 1. This allows you to turn the steering wheel with relatively little effort, while the axle of the steering wheel applies enough force to turn the car. 	simple machine consisting of two connected rings or cylinders that both turn around a single center point	3.f
Two simple machines that are based on the inclined plane are the wedge and the screw. Both increase the force used to move an object because the input force is applied over a greater distance than the output force. 	simple machine that consists of an inclined plane wrapped around a cylinder or cone	4.d
Did you ever use a hammer to pull a nail out of a board? If not, you can see how its done in Figure 16.18. When you pull down on the handle of the hammer, the claw end pulls up on the nail. A hammer is an example of a lever. A lever is a simple machine consisting of a bar that rotates around a fixed point called the fulcrum. For a video introduction to levers using skateboards as examples, go to this link:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  A lever may or may not increase the force applied, and it may or may not change the direction of the force. It all depends on the location of the input and output forces relative to the fulcrum. In this regard, there are three basic types of levers, called first-class, second-class, and third-class levers. Figure 16.19 describes the three classes. 	fixed point of a lever around which the bar rotates	5.g
The man in Figure 16.14 is using a ramp to move a heavy dryer up to the back of a truck. The highway in the figure switches back and forth so it climbs up the steep hillside. Both the ramp and the highway are examples of inclined planes. An inclined plane is a simple machine consisting of a sloping surface that connects lower and higher elevations. The sloping surface of the inclined plane supports part of the weight of the object as it moves up the slope. As a result, it takes less force to move the object uphill. The trade-off is that the object must be moved over a greater distance than if it were moved straight up to the higher elevation. On the other hand, the output force is greater than the input force because it is applied over a shorter distance. Like other simple machines, the ideal mechanical advantage of an inclined plane is given by: Ideal Mechanical Advantage = Input distance Output distance For an inclined plane, the input distance is the length of the sloping surface, and the output distance is the maximum height of the inclined plane. This was illustrated in Figure 16.12. Because the sloping surface is always greater than the height of the inclined plane, the ideal mechanical advantage of an inclined plane is always greater than 1. An inclined plane with a longer sloping surface relative to its height has a gentler slope. An inclined plane with a gentler slope has a greater mechanical advantage and requires less input force to move an object to a higher elevation. 	simple machine consisting of a sloping surface that connects lower and higher elevations	6.a
All three classes of levers make work easier, but they do so in different ways. When the input and output forces are on opposite sides of the fulcrum, the lever changes the direction of the applied force. This occurs only with a first-class lever. When both the input and output forces are on the same side of the fulcrum, the direction of the applied force does not change. This occurs with both second- and third-class levers. When the input force is applied farther from the fulcrum, the input distance is greater than the output distance, so the ideal mechanical advantage is greater than 1. This always occurs with second-class levers and may occur with first-class levers. When the input force is applied closer to the fulcrum, the input distance is less than the output distance, so the ideal mechanical advantage is less than 1. This always occurs with third-class levers and may occur with first-class levers. When both forces are the same distance from the fulcrum, the input distance equals the output distance, so the ideal mechanical advantage equals 1. This occurs only with first class-levers. 	type of lever in which input and output forces are on the same side of the fulcrum	7.b
The fishing rod with reel shown in Figure 16.25 is another compound machine. The rod is a third-class lever, with the fulcrum on one end of the rod, the input force close to the fulcrum, and the output force at the other end of the rod. The output distance is greater than the input distance, so the angler can fling the fishing line far out into the water with just a flick of the wrist. The reel is a wheel and axle that works as a pulley. The fishing line is wrapped around the wheel. Using the handle to turn the axle of the wheel winds or unwinds the line. 	how greatly a machine increases the applied force	1.b
Because compound machines have more moving parts than simple machines, they generally have more friction to overcome. As a result, compound machines tend to have lower efficiency than simple machines. When a compound machine consists of a large number of simple machines, friction may become a serious problem, and it may produce a lot of heat. Lubricants such as oil or grease may be used to coat the moving parts so they slide over each other more easily. This is how a cars friction is reduced. Compound machines have a greater mechanical advantage than simple machines. Thats because the mechanical advantage of a compound machine equals the product of the mechanical advantages of all its component simple machines. The greater the number of simple machines it contains, the greater is its mechanical advantage. 	how well a machine deals with friction	2.f
The fishing rod with reel shown in Figure 16.25 is another compound machine. The rod is a third-class lever, with the fulcrum on one end of the rod, the input force close to the fulcrum, and the output force at the other end of the rod. The output distance is greater than the input distance, so the angler can fling the fishing line far out into the water with just a flick of the wrist. The reel is a wheel and axle that works as a pulley. The fishing line is wrapped around the wheel. Using the handle to turn the axle of the wheel winds or unwinds the line. 	example of a third class lever	3.c
A compound machine is a machine that consists of more than one simple machine. Some compound machines consist of just two simple machines. For example, a wheelbarrow consists of a lever, as you read earlier in the lesson "Simple Machines," and also a wheel and axle. Other compound machines, such as cars, consist of hundreds or even thousands of simple machines. Two common examples of compound machines are scissors and fishing rods with reels. To view a young students compound machine invention that includes several simple machines, watch the video at this link:  . To see if you can identify the simple machines in a lawn mower, go to the URL below and click on Find the Simple Machines. 	any machine that consists of more than one simple machine	4.a
The fishing rod with reel shown in Figure 16.25 is another compound machine. The rod is a third-class lever, with the fulcrum on one end of the rod, the input force close to the fulcrum, and the output force at the other end of the rod. The output distance is greater than the input distance, so the angler can fling the fishing line far out into the water with just a flick of the wrist. The reel is a wheel and axle that works as a pulley. The fishing line is wrapped around the wheel. Using the handle to turn the axle of the wheel winds or unwinds the line. 	example of a wheel and axle that works as a pulley	5.e
The fishing rod with reel shown in Figure 16.25 is another compound machine. The rod is a third-class lever, with the fulcrum on one end of the rod, the input force close to the fulcrum, and the output force at the other end of the rod. The output distance is greater than the input distance, so the angler can fling the fishing line far out into the water with just a flick of the wrist. The reel is a wheel and axle that works as a pulley. The fishing line is wrapped around the wheel. Using the handle to turn the axle of the wheel winds or unwinds the line. 	machine consisting of a wheel and axle and a lever	6.d
Look at the scissors in Figure 16.24. As you can see from the figure, scissors consist of two levers and two wedges. You apply force to the handle ends of the levers, and the output force is exerted by the blade ends of the levers. The fulcrum of both levers is where they are joined together. Notice that the fulcrum lies between the input and output points, so the levers are first-class levers. They change the direction of force. They may or may not also increase force, depending on the relative lengths of the handles and blades. The blades themselves are wedges, with a sharp cutting edge and a thicker dull edge. 	machine consisting of two levers and two wedges	7.g
The fishing rod with reel shown in Figure 16.25 is another compound machine. The rod is a third-class lever, with the fulcrum on one end of the rod, the input force close to the fulcrum, and the output force at the other end of the rod. The output distance is greater than the input distance, so the angler can fling the fishing line far out into the water with just a flick of the wrist. The reel is a wheel and axle that works as a pulley. The fishing line is wrapped around the wheel. Using the handle to turn the axle of the wheel winds or unwinds the line. 	a wheel and axle is an example of a compound machine	false
The fishing rod with reel shown in Figure 16.25 is another compound machine. The rod is a third-class lever, with the fulcrum on one end of the rod, the input force close to the fulcrum, and the output force at the other end of the rod. The output distance is greater than the input distance, so the angler can fling the fishing line far out into the water with just a flick of the wrist. The reel is a wheel and axle that works as a pulley. The fishing line is wrapped around the wheel. Using the handle to turn the axle of the wheel winds or unwinds the line. 	a pulley system that contains a fixed and a moveable pulley is a compound machine	true
The fishing rod with reel shown in Figure 16.25 is another compound machine. The rod is a third-class lever, with the fulcrum on one end of the rod, the input force close to the fulcrum, and the output force at the other end of the rod. The output distance is greater than the input distance, so the angler can fling the fishing line far out into the water with just a flick of the wrist. The reel is a wheel and axle that works as a pulley. The fishing line is wrapped around the wheel. Using the handle to turn the axle of the wheel winds or unwinds the line. 	a single pulley is less efficient than a pulley system that consists of two or more pulleys	false
Because compound machines have more moving parts than simple machines, they generally have more friction to overcome. As a result, compound machines tend to have lower efficiency than simple machines. When a compound machine consists of a large number of simple machines, friction may become a serious problem, and it may produce a lot of heat. Lubricants such as oil or grease may be used to coat the moving parts so they slide over each other more easily. This is how a cars friction is reduced. Compound machines have a greater mechanical advantage than simple machines. Thats because the mechanical advantage of a compound machine equals the product of the mechanical advantages of all its component simple machines. The greater the number of simple machines it contains, the greater is its mechanical advantage. 	the mechanical advantage of a compound machine is generally less than that of a simple machine	false
Because compound machines have more moving parts than simple machines, they generally have more friction to overcome. As a result, compound machines tend to have lower efficiency than simple machines. When a compound machine consists of a large number of simple machines, friction may become a serious problem, and it may produce a lot of heat. Lubricants such as oil or grease may be used to coat the moving parts so they slide over each other more easily. This is how a cars friction is reduced. Compound machines have a greater mechanical advantage than simple machines. Thats because the mechanical advantage of a compound machine equals the product of the mechanical advantages of all its component simple machines. The greater the number of simple machines it contains, the greater is its mechanical advantage. 	friction tends to be a bigger problem in a compound machine than in a simple machine	true
A compound machine is a machine that consists of more than one simple machine. Some compound machines consist of just two simple machines. For example, a wheelbarrow consists of a lever, as you read earlier in the lesson "Simple Machines," and also a wheel and axle. Other compound machines, such as cars, consist of hundreds or even thousands of simple machines. Two common examples of compound machines are scissors and fishing rods with reels. To view a young students compound machine invention that includes several simple machines, watch the video at this link:  . To see if you can identify the simple machines in a lawn mower, go to the URL below and click on Find the Simple Machines. 	some compound machines consist of thousands of simple machines	true
Look at the scissors in Figure 16.24. As you can see from the figure, scissors consist of two levers and two wedges. You apply force to the handle ends of the levers, and the output force is exerted by the blade ends of the levers. The fulcrum of both levers is where they are joined together. Notice that the fulcrum lies between the input and output points, so the levers are first-class levers. They change the direction of force. They may or may not also increase force, depending on the relative lengths of the handles and blades. The blades themselves are wedges, with a sharp cutting edge and a thicker dull edge. 	the output force is exerted by the handle ends of the levers in scissors	false
Look at the scissors in Figure 16.24. As you can see from the figure, scissors consist of two levers and two wedges. You apply force to the handle ends of the levers, and the output force is exerted by the blade ends of the levers. The fulcrum of both levers is where they are joined together. Notice that the fulcrum lies between the input and output points, so the levers are first-class levers. They change the direction of force. They may or may not also increase force, depending on the relative lengths of the handles and blades. The blades themselves are wedges, with a sharp cutting edge and a thicker dull edge. 	scissors change the direction of the input force	true
The fishing rod with reel shown in Figure 16.25 is another compound machine. The rod is a third-class lever, with the fulcrum on one end of the rod, the input force close to the fulcrum, and the output force at the other end of the rod. The output distance is greater than the input distance, so the angler can fling the fishing line far out into the water with just a flick of the wrist. The reel is a wheel and axle that works as a pulley. The fishing line is wrapped around the wheel. Using the handle to turn the axle of the wheel winds or unwinds the line. 	the fulcrum in a fishing rod is at the center of the rod	false
Because compound machines have more moving parts than simple machines, they generally have more friction to overcome. As a result, compound machines tend to have lower efficiency than simple machines. When a compound machine consists of a large number of simple machines, friction may become a serious problem, and it may produce a lot of heat. Lubricants such as oil or grease may be used to coat the moving parts so they slide over each other more easily. This is how a cars friction is reduced. Compound machines have a greater mechanical advantage than simple machines. Thats because the mechanical advantage of a compound machine equals the product of the mechanical advantages of all its component simple machines. The greater the number of simple machines it contains, the greater is its mechanical advantage. 	compound machines have more moving parts than simple machines	true
Because compound machines have more moving parts than simple machines, they generally have more friction to overcome. As a result, compound machines tend to have lower efficiency than simple machines. When a compound machine consists of a large number of simple machines, friction may become a serious problem, and it may produce a lot of heat. Lubricants such as oil or grease may be used to coat the moving parts so they slide over each other more easily. This is how a cars friction is reduced. Compound machines have a greater mechanical advantage than simple machines. Thats because the mechanical advantage of a compound machine equals the product of the mechanical advantages of all its component simple machines. The greater the number of simple machines it contains, the greater is its mechanical advantage. 	the fewer simple machines a compound machine contains the greater its mechanical advantage	false
Because compound machines have more moving parts than simple machines, they generally have more friction to overcome. As a result, compound machines tend to have lower efficiency than simple machines. When a compound machine consists of a large number of simple machines, friction may become a serious problem, and it may produce a lot of heat. Lubricants such as oil or grease may be used to coat the moving parts so they slide over each other more easily. This is how a cars friction is reduced. Compound machines have a greater mechanical advantage than simple machines. Thats because the mechanical advantage of a compound machine equals the product of the mechanical advantages of all its component simple machines. The greater the number of simple machines it contains, the greater is its mechanical advantage. 	compound machines have more friction to overcome than do simple machines	true
Did you ever see a scene like the one in Figure 17.4? In many parts of the world, trees lose their leaves in autumn. The leaves turn color and then fall from the trees to the ground. As the leaves are falling, they have kinetic energy. While they are still attached to the trees they also have energy, but its not because of motion. Instead, they have stored energy, called potential energy. An object has potential energy because of its position or shape. For example leaves on trees have potential energy because they could fall due to the pull of gravity. 	energy stored in an object because of its position or shape	1.g
Potential energy due to an objects shape is called elastic potential energy. This energy results when elastic objects are stretched or compressed. Their elasticity gives them the potential to return to their original shape. For example, the rubber band in Figure 17.6 has been stretched, but it will spring back to its original shape when released. Springs like the handspring in the figure have elastic potential energy when they are compressed. What will happen when the handspring is released? 	stored energy due to an objects shape	2.f
The concept of energy was first introduced in the chapter "States of Matter," where it is defined as the ability to cause change in matter. Energy can also be defined as the ability to do work. Work is done whenever a force is used to move matter. When work is done, energy is transferred from one object to another. For example, when the batter in Figure 17.2 uses energy to swing the bat, she transfers energy to the bat. The moving bat, in turn, transfers energy to the ball. Like work, energy is measured in the joule (J), or newtonmeter (Nm). Energy exists in different forms, which you can read about in the lesson "Forms of Energy" later in the chapter. Some forms of energy are mechanical, electrical, and chemical energy. Most forms of energy can also be classified as kinetic or potential energy. Kinetic and potential forms of mechanical energy are the focus of this lesson. Mechanical energy is the energy of objects that are moving or have the potential to move. 	use of force to move matter	3.d
There are many other examples of energy conversions between potential and kinetic energy. Figure 17.7 describes how potential energy changes to kinetic energy and back again on swings and trampolines. You can see an animation of changes between potential and kinetic energy on a ramp at the URL below. Can you think of other examples? 	energy of moving matter	4.b
Did you ever see a scene like the one in Figure 17.4? In many parts of the world, trees lose their leaves in autumn. The leaves turn color and then fall from the trees to the ground. As the leaves are falling, they have kinetic energy. While they are still attached to the trees they also have energy, but its not because of motion. Instead, they have stored energy, called potential energy. An object has potential energy because of its position or shape. For example leaves on trees have potential energy because they could fall due to the pull of gravity. 	stored energy due to an objects position	5. e
The concept of energy was first introduced in the chapter "States of Matter," where it is defined as the ability to cause change in matter. Energy can also be defined as the ability to do work. Work is done whenever a force is used to move matter. When work is done, energy is transferred from one object to another. For example, when the batter in Figure 17.2 uses energy to swing the bat, she transfers energy to the bat. The moving bat, in turn, transfers energy to the ball. Like work, energy is measured in the joule (J), or newtonmeter (Nm). Energy exists in different forms, which you can read about in the lesson "Forms of Energy" later in the chapter. Some forms of energy are mechanical, electrical, and chemical energy. Most forms of energy can also be classified as kinetic or potential energy. Kinetic and potential forms of mechanical energy are the focus of this lesson. Mechanical energy is the energy of objects that are moving or have the potential to move. 	ability to do work	6. a
Remember the diver in Figure 17.5? What happens when he jumps off the diving board? His gravitational potential energy changes to kinetic energy as he falls toward the water. However, he can regain his potential energy by getting out of the water and climbing back up to the diving board. This requires an input of kinetic energy. These changes in energy are examples of energy conversion, the process in which energy changes from one type or form to another. 	process in which energy changes from one type or form to another	7. c
There are many other examples of energy conversions between potential and kinetic energy. Figure 17.7 describes how potential energy changes to kinetic energy and back again on swings and trampolines. You can see an animation of changes between potential and kinetic energy on a ramp at the URL below. Can you think of other examples? 	the atoms of matter have kinetic energy	true
There are many other examples of energy conversions between potential and kinetic energy. Figure 17.7 describes how potential energy changes to kinetic energy and back again on swings and trampolines. You can see an animation of changes between potential and kinetic energy on a ramp at the URL below. Can you think of other examples? 	an objects velocity affects its kinetic energy more than its mass does	true
Potential energy due to the position of an object above Earth is called gravitational potential energy. Like the leaves on trees, anything that is raised up above Earths surface has the potential to fall because of gravity. You can see examples of people with gravitational potential energy in Figure 17.5. Gravitational potential energy depends on an objects weight and its height above the ground. It can be calculated with the equation: Gravitational potential energy (GPE) = weight  height Consider the diver in Figure 17.5. If he weighs 70 newtons and the diving board is 5 meters above Earths surface, then his potential energy is: GPE = 70 N  5 m = 350 N  m, or 350 J 	a heavier object has less gravitational potential energy than a lighter object at the same height	false
Potential energy due to an objects shape is called elastic potential energy. This energy results when elastic objects are stretched or compressed. Their elasticity gives them the potential to return to their original shape. For example, the rubber band in Figure 17.6 has been stretched, but it will spring back to its original shape when released. Springs like the handspring in the figure have elastic potential energy when they are compressed. What will happen when the handspring is released? 	compressing a spring gives it potential energy	true
There are many other examples of energy conversions between potential and kinetic energy. Figure 17.7 describes how potential energy changes to kinetic energy and back again on swings and trampolines. You can see an animation of changes between potential and kinetic energy on a ramp at the URL below. Can you think of other examples? 	energy conversions cannot be reversed	false
There are many other examples of energy conversions between potential and kinetic energy. Figure 17.7 describes how potential energy changes to kinetic energy and back again on swings and trampolines. You can see an animation of changes between potential and kinetic energy on a ramp at the URL below. Can you think of other examples? 	most forms of energy can also be classified as kinetic or potential energy	true
There are many other examples of energy conversions between potential and kinetic energy. Figure 17.7 describes how potential energy changes to kinetic energy and back again on swings and trampolines. You can see an animation of changes between potential and kinetic energy on a ramp at the URL below. Can you think of other examples? 	if the mass of an object doubles its kinetic energy is only half as great	false
There are many other examples of energy conversions between potential and kinetic energy. Figure 17.7 describes how potential energy changes to kinetic energy and back again on swings and trampolines. You can see an animation of changes between potential and kinetic energy on a ramp at the URL below. Can you think of other examples? 	kinetic energy and velocity have an inverse relationship	false
There are many other examples of energy conversions between potential and kinetic energy. Figure 17.7 describes how potential energy changes to kinetic energy and back again on swings and trampolines. You can see an animation of changes between potential and kinetic energy on a ramp at the URL below. Can you think of other examples? 	clothes hanging motionless on a clothesline do not have any energy	false
Potential energy due to an objects shape is called elastic potential energy. This energy results when elastic objects are stretched or compressed. Their elasticity gives them the potential to return to their original shape. For example, the rubber band in Figure 17.6 has been stretched, but it will spring back to its original shape when released. Springs like the handspring in the figure have elastic potential energy when they are compressed. What will happen when the handspring is released? 	changing the shape of an elastic material gives it potential energy	true
Potential energy due to the position of an object above Earth is called gravitational potential energy. Like the leaves on trees, anything that is raised up above Earths surface has the potential to fall because of gravity. You can see examples of people with gravitational potential energy in Figure 17.5. Gravitational potential energy depends on an objects weight and its height above the ground. It can be calculated with the equation: Gravitational potential energy (GPE) = weight  height Consider the diver in Figure 17.5. If he weighs 70 newtons and the diving board is 5 meters above Earths surface, then his potential energy is: GPE = 70 N  5 m = 350 N  m, or 350 J 	if you double the weight of an object its gravitational potential energy also doubles	true
Potential energy due to the position of an object above Earth is called gravitational potential energy. Like the leaves on trees, anything that is raised up above Earths surface has the potential to fall because of gravity. You can see examples of people with gravitational potential energy in Figure 17.5. Gravitational potential energy depends on an objects weight and its height above the ground. It can be calculated with the equation: Gravitational potential energy (GPE) = weight  height Consider the diver in Figure 17.5. If he weighs 70 newtons and the diving board is 5 meters above Earths surface, then his potential energy is: GPE = 70 N  5 m = 350 N  m, or 350 J 	the higher above the ground you are the less gravitational potential energy you have	false
There are many other examples of energy conversions between potential and kinetic energy. Figure 17.7 describes how potential energy changes to kinetic energy and back again on swings and trampolines. You can see an animation of changes between potential and kinetic energy on a ramp at the URL below. Can you think of other examples? 	the energy of a child on a swing changes back and forth between kinetic and potential energy	true
The law of conservation of energy applies to energy conversions. Energy is not used up when it changes form, although some energy may be used to overcome friction, and this energy is usually given off as heat. For example, the divers kinetic energy at the bottom of his fall is the same as his potential energy when he was on the diving board, except for a small amount of heat resulting from friction with the air as he falls. 	some of the kinetic energy of the child in question 8 is given off as heat	true
There are many other examples of energy conversions between potential and kinetic energy. Figure 17.7 describes how potential energy changes to kinetic energy and back again on swings and trampolines. You can see an animation of changes between potential and kinetic energy on a ramp at the URL below. Can you think of other examples? 	energy conversions are always permanent changes in energy	false
The nuclei of atoms are held together by powerful forces. This gives them a tremendous amount of stored energy, called nuclear energy. The energy can be released and used to do work. This happens in nuclear power plants when nuclei fission, or split apart. It also happens in the sun and other stars when nuclei fuse, or join together. Some of the suns energy travels to Earth, where it warms the planet and provides the energy for photosynthesis (see Figure 	energy released when atomic nuclei split apart	1.c
The atoms that make up matter are in constant motion, so they have kinetic energy. All that motion gives matter thermal energy. Thermal energy is defined as the total kinetic energy of all the atoms that make up an object. It depends on how fast the atoms are moving and how many atoms the object has. Therefore, an object with more mass has greater thermal energy than an object with less mass, even if their individual atoms are moving at the same speed. You can see an example of this in Figure 17.13. 	total kinetic energy of all the atoms in an object	2.d
Energy is stored in the bonds between atoms that make up compounds. This energy is called chemical energy, and it is a form of potential energy. If the bonds between atoms are broken, the energy is released and can do work. The wood in the fireplace in Figure 17.10 has chemical energy. The energy is released as thermal energy when the wood burns. People and many other living things meet their energy needs with chemical energy stored in food. When food molecules are broken down, the energy is released and may be used to do work. 	energy stored in chemical bonds	3.a
Mechanical energy is the energy of an object that is moving or has the potential to move. It is the sum of an objects kinetic and potential energy. In Figure 17.9, the basketball has mechanical energy because it is moving. The arrow in the same figure has mechanical energy because it has the potential to move due to the elasticity of the bow. What are some other examples of mechanical energy? 	energy of an object that is moving or has the potential to move	4.f
Energy that the sun and other stars release into space is called electromagnetic energy. This form of energy travels through space as electrical and magnetic waves. Electromagnetic energy is commonly called light. It includes visible light, as well as radio waves, microwaves, and X rays (Figure 17.14). 	energy that travels in waves through matter from a vibrating object	5.g
Mechanical energy is the energy of an object that is moving or has the potential to move. It is the sum of an objects kinetic and potential energy. In Figure 17.9, the basketball has mechanical energy because it is moving. The arrow in the same figure has mechanical energy because it has the potential to move due to the elasticity of the bow. What are some other examples of mechanical energy? 	kinetic energy of moving electrons	6.b
Energy that the sun and other stars release into space is called electromagnetic energy. This form of energy travels through space as electrical and magnetic waves. Electromagnetic energy is commonly called light. It includes visible light, as well as radio waves, microwaves, and X rays (Figure 17.14). 	energy that travels in electrical and magnetic waves	7.e
Energy that the sun and other stars release into space is called electromagnetic energy. This form of energy travels through space as electrical and magnetic waves. Electromagnetic energy is commonly called light. It includes visible light, as well as radio waves, microwaves, and X rays (Figure 17.14). 	stars release electromagnetic energy into space	true
Energy is stored in the bonds between atoms that make up compounds. This energy is called chemical energy, and it is a form of potential energy. If the bonds between atoms are broken, the energy is released and can do work. The wood in the fireplace in Figure 17.10 has chemical energy. The energy is released as thermal energy when the wood burns. People and many other living things meet their energy needs with chemical energy stored in food. When food molecules are broken down, the energy is released and may be used to do work. 	the energy stored in food is chemical energy	true
Energy is stored in the bonds between atoms that make up compounds. This energy is called chemical energy, and it is a form of potential energy. If the bonds between atoms are broken, the energy is released and can do work. The wood in the fireplace in Figure 17.10 has chemical energy. The energy is released as thermal energy when the wood burns. People and many other living things meet their energy needs with chemical energy stored in food. When food molecules are broken down, the energy is released and may be used to do work. 	during photosynthesis plants change thermal energy to chemical energy	false
Mechanical energy is the energy of an object that is moving or has the potential to move. It is the sum of an objects kinetic and potential energy. In Figure 17.9, the basketball has mechanical energy because it is moving. The arrow in the same figure has mechanical energy because it has the potential to move due to the elasticity of the bow. What are some other examples of mechanical energy? 	a stretched rubber band has mechanical energy	true
Energy that the sun and other stars release into space is called electromagnetic energy. This form of energy travels through space as electrical and magnetic waves. Electromagnetic energy is commonly called light. It includes visible light, as well as radio waves, microwaves, and X rays (Figure 17.14). 	when you plug in a lamp electromagnetic energy is converted to light energy	false
Mechanical energy is the energy of an object that is moving or has the potential to move. It is the sum of an objects kinetic and potential energy. In Figure 17.9, the basketball has mechanical energy because it is moving. The arrow in the same figure has mechanical energy because it has the potential to move due to the elasticity of the bow. What are some other examples of mechanical energy? 	kinetic and potential energy add up to mechanical energy	true
Energy is stored in the bonds between atoms that make up compounds. This energy is called chemical energy, and it is a form of potential energy. If the bonds between atoms are broken, the energy is released and can do work. The wood in the fireplace in Figure 17.10 has chemical energy. The energy is released as thermal energy when the wood burns. People and many other living things meet their energy needs with chemical energy stored in food. When food molecules are broken down, the energy is released and may be used to do work. 	there is stored chemical energy in food	true
The nuclei of atoms are held together by powerful forces. This gives them a tremendous amount of stored energy, called nuclear energy. The energy can be released and used to do work. This happens in nuclear power plants when nuclei fission, or split apart. It also happens in the sun and other stars when nuclei fuse, or join together. Some of the suns energy travels to Earth, where it warms the planet and provides the energy for photosynthesis (see Figure 	a lightning bolt is a powerful discharge of light energy	false
Electrons are negatively charged particles in atoms. Moving electrons have a form of kinetic energy called electrical energy. If youve ever experienced an electric outage, then you know how hard it is to get by without electrical energy. Most of the electrical energy we use is produced by power plants and arrives in our homes through wires. Two other sources of electrical energy are pictured in Figure 17.11. 	most of the electrical energy we use is produced in power plants	true
The nuclei of atoms are held together by powerful forces. This gives them a tremendous amount of stored energy, called nuclear energy. The energy can be released and used to do work. This happens in nuclear power plants when nuclei fission, or split apart. It also happens in the sun and other stars when nuclei fuse, or join together. Some of the suns energy travels to Earth, where it warms the planet and provides the energy for photosynthesis (see Figure 	the sun produces nuclear energy when hydrogen nuclei undergo fusion	true
Energy that the sun and other stars release into space is called electromagnetic energy. This form of energy travels through space as electrical and magnetic waves. Electromagnetic energy is commonly called light. It includes visible light, as well as radio waves, microwaves, and X rays (Figure 17.14). 	some of the suns energy travels through space to heat and light earth	true
The atoms that make up matter are in constant motion, so they have kinetic energy. All that motion gives matter thermal energy. Thermal energy is defined as the total kinetic energy of all the atoms that make up an object. It depends on how fast the atoms are moving and how many atoms the object has. Therefore, an object with more mass has greater thermal energy than an object with less mass, even if their individual atoms are moving at the same speed. You can see an example of this in Figure 17.13. 	the atoms that make up matter are in constant motion	true
Energy that the sun and other stars release into space is called electromagnetic energy. This form of energy travels through space as electrical and magnetic waves. Electromagnetic energy is commonly called light. It includes visible light, as well as radio waves, microwaves, and X rays (Figure 17.14). 	radio waves are a type of sound waves	false
Mechanical energy is the energy of an object that is moving or has the potential to move. It is the sum of an objects kinetic and potential energy. In Figure 17.9, the basketball has mechanical energy because it is moving. The arrow in the same figure has mechanical energy because it has the potential to move due to the elasticity of the bow. What are some other examples of mechanical energy? 	energy rarely changes from one form to another	false
Mechanical energy is the energy of an object that is moving or has the potential to move. It is the sum of an objects kinetic and potential energy. In Figure 17.9, the basketball has mechanical energy because it is moving. The arrow in the same figure has mechanical energy because it has the potential to move due to the elasticity of the bow. What are some other examples of mechanical energy? 	one form of energy cannot change into two or more different forms of energy	false
Nonrenewable resources are natural resources that are limited in supply and cannot be replaced except over millions of years. Nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels and radioactive elements such as uranium. 	all natural resources need to be conserved so they are not used up	false
The largest solar thermal plant in the world opens in Californias Mojave Desert, after a debate that pitted renewable energy against a threatened tortoise. The Ivanpah solar plant is one of seven big solar farms scheduled to open in California in the coming months, as a result of the states push to produce one third of its electricity from renewable energy. Some 30 states have similar mandates. For more information on this solar plant, see http://science.kqed.org/ MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	most of the electricity in the us is generated by burning petroleum	false
Nonrenewable resources are natural resources that are limited in supply and cannot be replaced except over millions of years. Nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels and radioactive elements such as uranium. 	the use of fossil fuels is a major cause of global warming	true
Figure 17.22 shows the mix of energy resources used worldwide in 2006. Fossil fuels still provide most of the worlds energy, with oil being the single most commonly used energy resource. Natural gas is used less than the other two fossil fuels, but even natural gas is used more than all renewable energy resources combined. Wind, solar, and geothermal energy contribute the least to global energy use, despite the fact that they are virtually limitless in supply and nonpolluting. 	nuclear energy is a renewable energy resource	false
Fossil fuels are mixtures of hydrocarbons that formed over millions of years from the remains of dead organisms. They include petroleum (commonly called oil), natural gas, and coal. Fossil fuels provide most of the energy used in the world today. They are burned in power plants to produce electrical energy, and they also fuel cars, heat homes, and supply energy for many other purposes. You can see examples of their use in Figure 17.19. Fossil fuels contain stored chemical energy that came originally from the sun. Ancient plants changed energy in 	natural gas formed when the remains of swamp plants were pressed beneath layers of sediments	false
Nonrenewable resources are natural resources that are limited in supply and cannot be replaced except over millions of years. Nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels and radioactive elements such as uranium. 	it takes millions of years for fossil fuels to form	true
Nonrenewable resources are natural resources that are limited in supply and cannot be replaced except over millions of years. Nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels and radioactive elements such as uranium. 	most of the electric power in the us is generated from running water	false
Nonrenewable resources are natural resources that are limited in supply and cannot be replaced except over millions of years. Nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels and radioactive elements such as uranium. 	the burning of fossil fuels leads to the formation of acid rain	true
Nonrenewable resources are natural resources that are limited in supply and cannot be replaced except over millions of years. Nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels and radioactive elements such as uranium. 	it takes a large amount of uranium to produce a small amount of nuclear energy	false
We can reduce our use of energy resources and the pollution they cause by conserving energy. Conservation means saving resources by using them more efficiently or not using them at all. Figure 17.24 shows several ways that people can conserve energy in their daily lives. You can find more energy-saving tips at the URL below. What do you do to save energy? What else could you do? 	renewable energy resources produce air pollution	false
Nonrenewable resources are natural resources that are limited in supply and cannot be replaced except over millions of years. Nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels and radioactive elements such as uranium. 	fossil fuels provide most of the worlds energy	true
Fossil fuels are mixtures of hydrocarbons that formed over millions of years from the remains of dead organisms. They include petroleum (commonly called oil), natural gas, and coal. Fossil fuels provide most of the energy used in the world today. They are burned in power plants to produce electrical energy, and they also fuel cars, heat homes, and supply energy for many other purposes. You can see examples of their use in Figure 17.19. Fossil fuels contain stored chemical energy that came originally from the sun. Ancient plants changed energy in 	coal and petroleum are often found together	false
Nonrenewable resources are natural resources that are limited in supply and cannot be replaced except over millions of years. Nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels and radioactive elements such as uranium. 	smog comes from the burning of fossil fuels	true
Solar and wind power may get the headlines when it comes to renewable energy. But another type of clean power is heating up in the hills just north of Sonoma wine country. Geothermal power uses heat from deep inside the Earth to generate electricity. The Geysers, the worlds largest power-producing geothermal field, has been providing electricity for roughly 850,000 Northern California households, and is set to expand even further. For more information on geothermal energy, see http://science.kqed.org/quest/video/geothermal-heats-up/ . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	using moving water to generate electricity never harms the environment	false
On the windswept tarmac of the former Alameda Naval Air Station, an inventive group of scientists and engineers are test-flying a kite-like tethered wing that may someday help revolutionize clean energy. QUEST explores the potential of wind energy and new airborne wind turbines designed to harness the stronger and more consistent winds found at higher altitudes. For more information on wind energy, see http://science.kqed.org/quest/video/airborne MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	wind turbines change the kinetic energy of wind to electrical energy	true
We can reduce our use of energy resources and the pollution they cause by conserving energy. Conservation means saving resources by using them more efficiently or not using them at all. Figure 17.24 shows several ways that people can conserve energy in their daily lives. You can find more energy-saving tips at the URL below. What do you do to save energy? What else could you do? 	saving resources by using them more efficiently	1.a
Nonrenewable resources are natural resources that are limited in supply and cannot be replaced except over millions of years. Nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels and radioactive elements such as uranium. 	resource that is limited in supply and cannot be replaced	2.g
The largest solar thermal plant in the world opens in Californias Mojave Desert, after a debate that pitted renewable energy against a threatened tortoise. The Ivanpah solar plant is one of seven big solar farms scheduled to open in California in the coming months, as a result of the states push to produce one third of its electricity from renewable energy. Some 30 states have similar mandates. For more information on this solar plant, see http://science.kqed.org/ MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	energy from plant materials	3.d
Fossil fuels are mixtures of hydrocarbons that formed over millions of years from the remains of dead organisms. They include petroleum (commonly called oil), natural gas, and coal. Fossil fuels provide most of the energy used in the world today. They are burned in power plants to produce electrical energy, and they also fuel cars, heat homes, and supply energy for many other purposes. You can see examples of their use in Figure 17.19. Fossil fuels contain stored chemical energy that came originally from the sun. Ancient plants changed energy in 	mixture of hydrocarbons that formed from the remains of dead organisms	4.c
We can reduce our use of energy resources and the pollution they cause by conserving energy. Conservation means saving resources by using them more efficiently or not using them at all. Figure 17.24 shows several ways that people can conserve energy in their daily lives. You can find more energy-saving tips at the URL below. What do you do to save energy? What else could you do? 	heat from below earths surface that can be used for energy	5.f
Nonrenewable resources are natural resources that are limited in supply and cannot be replaced except over millions of years. Nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels and radioactive elements such as uranium. 	anything people use that comes from nature	6.b
Figure 17.22 shows the mix of energy resources used worldwide in 2006. Fossil fuels still provide most of the worlds energy, with oil being the single most commonly used energy resource. Natural gas is used less than the other two fossil fuels, but even natural gas is used more than all renewable energy resources combined. Wind, solar, and geothermal energy contribute the least to global energy use, despite the fact that they are virtually limitless in supply and nonpolluting. 	resource that is virtually limitless in supply or can be replaced quickly	7.e
No doubt you already have a good idea of what temperature is. You might define it as how hot or cold something feels. In physics, temperature is defined as the average kinetic energy of the particles in an object. When particles move more quickly, temperature is higher and an object feels warmer. When particles move more slowly, temperature is lower and an object feels cooler. 	device for measuring temperature	1. d
No doubt you already have a good idea of what temperature is. You might define it as how hot or cold something feels. In physics, temperature is defined as the average kinetic energy of the particles in an object. When particles move more quickly, temperature is higher and an object feels warmer. When particles move more slowly, temperature is lower and an object feels cooler. 	total kinetic energy of particles of matter	2. a
The roadway across the Golden Gate Bridge rises and falls as much as 16 feet depending on the temperature. When the sun hits the bridge, the metal expands and the bridge cables stretch. As the fog rolls in, the cables contract and the bridge goes up. Curators from the Outdoor Exploratorium in San Francisco have set up a scope two miles away so you can see how the bridge is moving up or down depending on the weather. For more information on how the bridge moves due to temperature, see http://science.kqed.org/quest/video/quest-lab-bridge-thermometer/ . Heat is the transfer of thermal energy between objects that have different temperatures. Thermal energy always moves from an object with a higher temperature to an object with a lower temperature. Specific heat is the amount of energy (in joules) needed to raise the temperature of 1 gram of a substance by 1C. Substances differ in their specific heat. 	amount of energy needed to raise the temperature of 1 gram of a substance by 1 c	3.g
No doubt you already have a good idea of what temperature is. You might define it as how hot or cold something feels. In physics, temperature is defined as the average kinetic energy of the particles in an object. When particles move more quickly, temperature is higher and an object feels warmer. When particles move more slowly, temperature is lower and an object feels cooler. 	average kinetic energy of particles of matter	4.c
Temperature is measured with a thermometer. A thermometer shows how hot or cold something is relative to two reference temperatures, usually the freezing and boiling points of water. Scientists often use the Celsius scale for temperature. On this scale, the freezing point of water is 0C and the boiling point is 100C. To learn more about measuring temperature, watch the animation Measuring Temperature at this URL:  Did you ever wonder how a thermometer works? Look at the thermometer in Figure 18.2. Particles of the red liquid have greater energy when they are warmer, so they move more and spread apart. This causes the liquid to expand and rise higher in the glass tube. Like the liquid in a thermometer, most types of matter expand to some degree when they get warmer. Gases usually expand the most when heated, followed by liquids. Solids generally expand the least. (Water is an exception; it takes up more space as a solid than as a liquid.) 	scale for measuring temperature	5.f
Something that has a high temperature is said to be hot. Does temperature measure heat? Is heat just another word for thermal energy? The answer to both questions is no. Heat is the transfer of thermal energy between objects that have different temperatures. Thermal energy always moves from an object with a higher temperature to an object with a lower temperature. When thermal energy is transferred in this way, the warm object becomes cooler and the cool object becomes warmer. Sooner or later, both objects will have the same temperature. Only then does the transfer of thermal energy end. For a visual explanation of these concepts, watch the animation "Temperature vs. Heat" at this URL:  . 	transfer of thermal energy between objects with different temperatures	6.b
Something that has a high temperature is said to be hot. Does temperature measure heat? Is heat just another word for thermal energy? The answer to both questions is no. Heat is the transfer of thermal energy between objects that have different temperatures. Thermal energy always moves from an object with a higher temperature to an object with a lower temperature. When thermal energy is transferred in this way, the warm object becomes cooler and the cool object becomes warmer. Sooner or later, both objects will have the same temperature. Only then does the transfer of thermal energy end. For a visual explanation of these concepts, watch the animation "Temperature vs. Heat" at this URL:  . 	measure that affects the thermal energy of matter but not its temperature	7.e
No doubt you already have a good idea of what temperature is. You might define it as how hot or cold something feels. In physics, temperature is defined as the average kinetic energy of the particles in an object. When particles move more quickly, temperature is higher and an object feels warmer. When particles move more slowly, temperature is lower and an object feels cooler. 	the particles of all matter are in constant random motion	true
No doubt you already have a good idea of what temperature is. You might define it as how hot or cold something feels. In physics, temperature is defined as the average kinetic energy of the particles in an object. When particles move more quickly, temperature is higher and an object feels warmer. When particles move more slowly, temperature is lower and an object feels cooler. 	objects with the same temperature always have the same total kinetic energy	false
Temperature is measured with a thermometer. A thermometer shows how hot or cold something is relative to two reference temperatures, usually the freezing and boiling points of water. Scientists often use the Celsius scale for temperature. On this scale, the freezing point of water is 0C and the boiling point is 100C. To learn more about measuring temperature, watch the animation Measuring Temperature at this URL:  Did you ever wonder how a thermometer works? Look at the thermometer in Figure 18.2. Particles of the red liquid have greater energy when they are warmer, so they move more and spread apart. This causes the liquid to expand and rise higher in the glass tube. Like the liquid in a thermometer, most types of matter expand to some degree when they get warmer. Gases usually expand the most when heated, followed by liquids. Solids generally expand the least. (Water is an exception; it takes up more space as a solid than as a liquid.) 	a thermometer measures temperature relative to two reference temperatures	true
Something that has a high temperature is said to be hot. Does temperature measure heat? Is heat just another word for thermal energy? The answer to both questions is no. Heat is the transfer of thermal energy between objects that have different temperatures. Thermal energy always moves from an object with a higher temperature to an object with a lower temperature. When thermal energy is transferred in this way, the warm object becomes cooler and the cool object becomes warmer. Sooner or later, both objects will have the same temperature. Only then does the transfer of thermal energy end. For a visual explanation of these concepts, watch the animation "Temperature vs. Heat" at this URL:  . 	heat is always transferred from a larger object to a smaller object	false
The girls in Figure 18.4 are having fun at the beach. Its a warm, sunny day, and the sand feels hot under their bare hands and feet. The water, in contrast, feels much cooler. Why does the sand get so hot while the water does not? The answer has to do with specific heat. Specific heat is the amount of energy (in joules) needed to raise the temperature of 1 gram of a substance by 1C. Specific heat is a property that is specific to a given type of matter. Table 18.1 lists the specific heat of four different substances. Metals such as iron have relatively low specific heat. It doesnt take much energy to raise their temperature. Thats why a metal spoon heats up quickly when placed in hot coffee. Sand also has a relatively low specific heat, whereas water has a very high specific heat. It takes a lot more energy to increase the temperature of water than sand. This explains why the sand on a beach gets hot while the water stays cool. Differences in the specific heat of water and land also affect climate. To learn how, watch the video at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  In Table 18.1, how much greater is the specific heat of water than sand? Substances iron sand wood water Specific Heat (joules) 0.45 0.67 1.76 4.18 	differences in the specific heat of land and water affect climate	true
Something that has a high temperature is said to be hot. Does temperature measure heat? Is heat just another word for thermal energy? The answer to both questions is no. Heat is the transfer of thermal energy between objects that have different temperatures. Thermal energy always moves from an object with a higher temperature to an object with a lower temperature. When thermal energy is transferred in this way, the warm object becomes cooler and the cool object becomes warmer. Sooner or later, both objects will have the same temperature. Only then does the transfer of thermal energy end. For a visual explanation of these concepts, watch the animation "Temperature vs. Heat" at this URL:  . 	only warm or hot objects have thermal energy	false
No doubt you already have a good idea of what temperature is. You might define it as how hot or cold something feels. In physics, temperature is defined as the average kinetic energy of the particles in an object. When particles move more quickly, temperature is higher and an object feels warmer. When particles move more slowly, temperature is lower and an object feels cooler. 	if particles of an object start to move more quickly the objects temperature rises	true
No doubt you already have a good idea of what temperature is. You might define it as how hot or cold something feels. In physics, temperature is defined as the average kinetic energy of the particles in an object. When particles move more quickly, temperature is higher and an object feels warmer. When particles move more slowly, temperature is lower and an object feels cooler. 	temperature is the same thing as thermal energy	false
No doubt you already have a good idea of what temperature is. You might define it as how hot or cold something feels. In physics, temperature is defined as the average kinetic energy of the particles in an object. When particles move more quickly, temperature is higher and an object feels warmer. When particles move more slowly, temperature is lower and an object feels cooler. 	an object with a higher temperature always has greater thermal energy than an object with a lower	false
Temperature is measured with a thermometer. A thermometer shows how hot or cold something is relative to two reference temperatures, usually the freezing and boiling points of water. Scientists often use the Celsius scale for temperature. On this scale, the freezing point of water is 0C and the boiling point is 100C. To learn more about measuring temperature, watch the animation Measuring Temperature at this URL:  Did you ever wonder how a thermometer works? Look at the thermometer in Figure 18.2. Particles of the red liquid have greater energy when they are warmer, so they move more and spread apart. This causes the liquid to expand and rise higher in the glass tube. Like the liquid in a thermometer, most types of matter expand to some degree when they get warmer. Gases usually expand the most when heated, followed by liquids. Solids generally expand the least. (Water is an exception; it takes up more space as a solid than as a liquid.) 	on the celsius scale the boiling point of water is 32 c	false
Temperature is measured with a thermometer. A thermometer shows how hot or cold something is relative to two reference temperatures, usually the freezing and boiling points of water. Scientists often use the Celsius scale for temperature. On this scale, the freezing point of water is 0C and the boiling point is 100C. To learn more about measuring temperature, watch the animation Measuring Temperature at this URL:  Did you ever wonder how a thermometer works? Look at the thermometer in Figure 18.2. Particles of the red liquid have greater energy when they are warmer, so they move more and spread apart. This causes the liquid to expand and rise higher in the glass tube. Like the liquid in a thermometer, most types of matter expand to some degree when they get warmer. Gases usually expand the most when heated, followed by liquids. Solids generally expand the least. (Water is an exception; it takes up more space as a solid than as a liquid.) 	most types of matter expand to some degree when they get warmer	true
No doubt you already have a good idea of what temperature is. You might define it as how hot or cold something feels. In physics, temperature is defined as the average kinetic energy of the particles in an object. When particles move more quickly, temperature is higher and an object feels warmer. When particles move more slowly, temperature is lower and an object feels cooler. 	temperature is a physical property of matter	false
No doubt you already have a good idea of what temperature is. You might define it as how hot or cold something feels. In physics, temperature is defined as the average kinetic energy of the particles in an object. When particles move more quickly, temperature is higher and an object feels warmer. When particles move more slowly, temperature is lower and an object feels cooler. 	thermal energy always moves from an object with a higher temperature to an object with a lower	true
The girls in Figure 18.4 are having fun at the beach. Its a warm, sunny day, and the sand feels hot under their bare hands and feet. The water, in contrast, feels much cooler. Why does the sand get so hot while the water does not? The answer has to do with specific heat. Specific heat is the amount of energy (in joules) needed to raise the temperature of 1 gram of a substance by 1C. Specific heat is a property that is specific to a given type of matter. Table 18.1 lists the specific heat of four different substances. Metals such as iron have relatively low specific heat. It doesnt take much energy to raise their temperature. Thats why a metal spoon heats up quickly when placed in hot coffee. Sand also has a relatively low specific heat, whereas water has a very high specific heat. It takes a lot more energy to increase the temperature of water than sand. This explains why the sand on a beach gets hot while the water stays cool. Differences in the specific heat of water and land also affect climate. To learn how, watch the video at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  In Table 18.1, how much greater is the specific heat of water than sand? Substances iron sand wood water Specific Heat (joules) 0.45 0.67 1.76 4.18 	specific heat is a property that is specific to a given type of matter	true
The girls in Figure 18.4 are having fun at the beach. Its a warm, sunny day, and the sand feels hot under their bare hands and feet. The water, in contrast, feels much cooler. Why does the sand get so hot while the water does not? The answer has to do with specific heat. Specific heat is the amount of energy (in joules) needed to raise the temperature of 1 gram of a substance by 1C. Specific heat is a property that is specific to a given type of matter. Table 18.1 lists the specific heat of four different substances. Metals such as iron have relatively low specific heat. It doesnt take much energy to raise their temperature. Thats why a metal spoon heats up quickly when placed in hot coffee. Sand also has a relatively low specific heat, whereas water has a very high specific heat. It takes a lot more energy to increase the temperature of water than sand. This explains why the sand on a beach gets hot while the water stays cool. Differences in the specific heat of water and land also affect climate. To learn how, watch the video at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  In Table 18.1, how much greater is the specific heat of water than sand? Substances iron sand wood water Specific Heat (joules) 0.45 0.67 1.76 4.18 	most metals have a very high specific heat	false
Conduction is the transfer of thermal energy between particles of matter that are touching. When energetic particles collide with nearby particles, they transfer some of their thermal energy. From particle to particle, like dominoes falling, thermal energy moves throughout a substance. In Figure 18.5, conduction occurs between particles of the metal in the pot and between particles of the pot and the water. Figure 18.6 shows additional examples of conduction. For a deeper understanding of this method of heat transfer, watch the animation "Conduction" at this URL: http://w 	material that allows little if any conduction of thermal energy	1.d
Both conduction and convection transfer energy through matter. Radiation is the only way of transferring energy that doesnt require matter. Radiation is the transfer of energy by waves that can travel through empty space. When the waves reach objects, they transfer energy to the objects, causing them to warm up. This is how the suns energy reaches Earth and heats its surface (see Figure 18.10). Radiation is also how thermal energy from a campfire warms people nearby. You might be surprised to learn that all objects radiate thermal energy, including people. In fact, when a room is full of people, it may feel noticeably warmer because of all the thermal energy the people radiate! To learn more about thermal radiation, watch "Radiation" at the URL below. 	transfer of thermal energy by waves that can travel through space	2.e
Convection is the transfer of thermal energy by particles moving through a fluid. Particles transfer energy by moving from warmer to cooler areas. Thats how energy is transferred in the soup in Figure 18.7. Particles of soup near the bottom of the pot get hot first. They have more energy so they spread out and become less dense. With lower density, these particles rise to the top of the pot (see Figure 18.8). By the time they reach the top of the pot they have cooled off. They have less energy to move apart, so they become denser. With greater density, the particles sink to the bottom of the pot, and the cycle repeats. This loop of moving particles is called a convection current. Convection currents move thermal energy through many fluids, including molten rock inside Earth, water in the oceans, and air in the atmosphere. In the atmosphere, convection currents create wind. You can see one way this happens in Figure 18.9. Land heats up and cools off faster than water because it has lower specific heat. Therefore, land is warmer during the day and cooler at night than water. Air close to the surface gains or loses heat as well. Warm air rises because it is less dense, and when it does, cool air moves in to take its place. This creates a convection current that carries air from the warmer to the cooler area. You can learn more about convection currents by watching "Convection" at this URL:  . 	flow of particles in a fluid due to differences in temperature and density	3.f
Both conduction and convection transfer energy through matter. Radiation is the only way of transferring energy that doesnt require matter. Radiation is the transfer of energy by waves that can travel through empty space. When the waves reach objects, they transfer energy to the objects, causing them to warm up. This is how the suns energy reaches Earth and heats its surface (see Figure 18.10). Radiation is also how thermal energy from a campfire warms people nearby. You might be surprised to learn that all objects radiate thermal energy, including people. In fact, when a room is full of people, it may feel noticeably warmer because of all the thermal energy the people radiate! To learn more about thermal radiation, watch "Radiation" at the URL below. 	material that is good at transferring thermal energy by conduction	4.b
Conduction is the transfer of thermal energy between particles of matter that are touching. When energetic particles collide with nearby particles, they transfer some of their thermal energy. From particle to particle, like dominoes falling, thermal energy moves throughout a substance. In Figure 18.5, conduction occurs between particles of the metal in the pot and between particles of the pot and the water. Figure 18.6 shows additional examples of conduction. For a deeper understanding of this method of heat transfer, watch the animation "Conduction" at this URL: http://w 	amount of mass in a given volume of matter	5.g
Conduction is the transfer of thermal energy between particles of matter that are touching. When energetic particles collide with nearby particles, they transfer some of their thermal energy. From particle to particle, like dominoes falling, thermal energy moves throughout a substance. In Figure 18.5, conduction occurs between particles of the metal in the pot and between particles of the pot and the water. Figure 18.6 shows additional examples of conduction. For a deeper understanding of this method of heat transfer, watch the animation "Conduction" at this URL: http://w 	transfer of thermal energy between particles of matter that are touching	6.a
Conduction is the transfer of thermal energy between particles of matter that are touching. When energetic particles collide with nearby particles, they transfer some of their thermal energy. From particle to particle, like dominoes falling, thermal energy moves throughout a substance. In Figure 18.5, conduction occurs between particles of the metal in the pot and between particles of the pot and the water. Figure 18.6 shows additional examples of conduction. For a deeper understanding of this method of heat transfer, watch the animation "Conduction" at this URL: http://w 	transfer of thermal energy by particles moving through a fluid	7.c
Conduction is the transfer of thermal energy between particles of matter that are touching. When energetic particles collide with nearby particles, they transfer some of their thermal energy. From particle to particle, like dominoes falling, thermal energy moves throughout a substance. In Figure 18.5, conduction occurs between particles of the metal in the pot and between particles of the pot and the water. Figure 18.6 shows additional examples of conduction. For a deeper understanding of this method of heat transfer, watch the animation "Conduction" at this URL: http://w 	conduction occurs when particles of matter flow	false
Particles of gases are farther apart and have fewer collisions, so they are not good at transferring thermal energy. Materials that are poor thermal conductors are called thermal insulators. Figure 18.7 shows several examples. Fluffy yellow insulation inside the roof of a home is full of air. The air prevents the transfer of thermal energy into the house on hot days and out of the house on cold days. A puffy down jacket keeps you warm in the winter for the same reason. Its feather filling holds trapped air that prevents energy transfer from your warm body to the cold air outside. Solids like plastic and wood are also good thermal insulators. Thats why pot handles and cooking utensils are often made of these materials. 	insulation can keep a house cool on a hot day	true
Both conduction and convection transfer energy through matter. Radiation is the only way of transferring energy that doesnt require matter. Radiation is the transfer of energy by waves that can travel through empty space. When the waves reach objects, they transfer energy to the objects, causing them to warm up. This is how the suns energy reaches Earth and heats its surface (see Figure 18.10). Radiation is also how thermal energy from a campfire warms people nearby. You might be surprised to learn that all objects radiate thermal energy, including people. In fact, when a room is full of people, it may feel noticeably warmer because of all the thermal energy the people radiate! To learn more about thermal radiation, watch "Radiation" at the URL below. 	thermal energy is always transferred from cooler to warmer objects	false
Convection is the transfer of thermal energy by particles moving through a fluid. Particles transfer energy by moving from warmer to cooler areas. Thats how energy is transferred in the soup in Figure 18.7. Particles of soup near the bottom of the pot get hot first. They have more energy so they spread out and become less dense. With lower density, these particles rise to the top of the pot (see Figure 18.8). By the time they reach the top of the pot they have cooled off. They have less energy to move apart, so they become denser. With greater density, the particles sink to the bottom of the pot, and the cycle repeats. This loop of moving particles is called a convection current. Convection currents move thermal energy through many fluids, including molten rock inside Earth, water in the oceans, and air in the atmosphere. In the atmosphere, convection currents create wind. You can see one way this happens in Figure 18.9. Land heats up and cools off faster than water because it has lower specific heat. Therefore, land is warmer during the day and cooler at night than water. Air close to the surface gains or loses heat as well. Warm air rises because it is less dense, and when it does, cool air moves in to take its place. This creates a convection current that carries air from the warmer to the cooler area. You can learn more about convection currents by watching "Convection" at this URL:  . 	land and sea breezes are examples of convection currents	true
Both conduction and convection transfer energy through matter. Radiation is the only way of transferring energy that doesnt require matter. Radiation is the transfer of energy by waves that can travel through empty space. When the waves reach objects, they transfer energy to the objects, causing them to warm up. This is how the suns energy reaches Earth and heats its surface (see Figure 18.10). Radiation is also how thermal energy from a campfire warms people nearby. You might be surprised to learn that all objects radiate thermal energy, including people. In fact, when a room is full of people, it may feel noticeably warmer because of all the thermal energy the people radiate! To learn more about thermal radiation, watch "Radiation" at the URL below. 	only hot objects radiate thermal energy	false
Conduction is the transfer of thermal energy between particles of matter that are touching. When energetic particles collide with nearby particles, they transfer some of their thermal energy. From particle to particle, like dominoes falling, thermal energy moves throughout a substance. In Figure 18.5, conduction occurs between particles of the metal in the pot and between particles of the pot and the water. Figure 18.6 shows additional examples of conduction. For a deeper understanding of this method of heat transfer, watch the animation "Conduction" at this URL: http://w 	conduction occurs only between particles that collide	true
Particles of gases are farther apart and have fewer collisions, so they are not good at transferring thermal energy. Materials that are poor thermal conductors are called thermal insulators. Figure 18.7 shows several examples. Fluffy yellow insulation inside the roof of a home is full of air. The air prevents the transfer of thermal energy into the house on hot days and out of the house on cold days. A puffy down jacket keeps you warm in the winter for the same reason. Its feather filling holds trapped air that prevents energy transfer from your warm body to the cold air outside. Solids like plastic and wood are also good thermal insulators. Thats why pot handles and cooking utensils are often made of these materials. 	wood is an example of a good thermal conductor	false
Particles of gases are farther apart and have fewer collisions, so they are not good at transferring thermal energy. Materials that are poor thermal conductors are called thermal insulators. Figure 18.7 shows several examples. Fluffy yellow insulation inside the roof of a home is full of air. The air prevents the transfer of thermal energy into the house on hot days and out of the house on cold days. A puffy down jacket keeps you warm in the winter for the same reason. Its feather filling holds trapped air that prevents energy transfer from your warm body to the cold air outside. Solids like plastic and wood are also good thermal insulators. Thats why pot handles and cooking utensils are often made of these materials. 	home insulation prevents the transfer of cold into the house	false
Convection is the transfer of thermal energy by particles moving through a fluid. Particles transfer energy by moving from warmer to cooler areas. Thats how energy is transferred in the soup in Figure 18.7. Particles of soup near the bottom of the pot get hot first. They have more energy so they spread out and become less dense. With lower density, these particles rise to the top of the pot (see Figure 18.8). By the time they reach the top of the pot they have cooled off. They have less energy to move apart, so they become denser. With greater density, the particles sink to the bottom of the pot, and the cycle repeats. This loop of moving particles is called a convection current. Convection currents move thermal energy through many fluids, including molten rock inside Earth, water in the oceans, and air in the atmosphere. In the atmosphere, convection currents create wind. You can see one way this happens in Figure 18.9. Land heats up and cools off faster than water because it has lower specific heat. Therefore, land is warmer during the day and cooler at night than water. Air close to the surface gains or loses heat as well. Warm air rises because it is less dense, and when it does, cool air moves in to take its place. This creates a convection current that carries air from the warmer to the cooler area. You can learn more about convection currents by watching "Convection" at this URL:  . 	warmer air rises because it is less dense than cooler air	true
Both conduction and convection transfer energy through matter. Radiation is the only way of transferring energy that doesnt require matter. Radiation is the transfer of energy by waves that can travel through empty space. When the waves reach objects, they transfer energy to the objects, causing them to warm up. This is how the suns energy reaches Earth and heats its surface (see Figure 18.10). Radiation is also how thermal energy from a campfire warms people nearby. You might be surprised to learn that all objects radiate thermal energy, including people. In fact, when a room is full of people, it may feel noticeably warmer because of all the thermal energy the people radiate! To learn more about thermal radiation, watch "Radiation" at the URL below. 	all objects radiate thermal energy	true
Both conduction and convection transfer energy through matter. Radiation is the only way of transferring energy that doesnt require matter. Radiation is the transfer of energy by waves that can travel through empty space. When the waves reach objects, they transfer energy to the objects, causing them to warm up. This is how the suns energy reaches Earth and heats its surface (see Figure 18.10). Radiation is also how thermal energy from a campfire warms people nearby. You might be surprised to learn that all objects radiate thermal energy, including people. In fact, when a room is full of people, it may feel noticeably warmer because of all the thermal energy the people radiate! To learn more about thermal radiation, watch "Radiation" at the URL below. 	convection currents carry thermal energy from the sun to earth	false
Convection is the transfer of thermal energy by particles moving through a fluid. Particles transfer energy by moving from warmer to cooler areas. Thats how energy is transferred in the soup in Figure 18.7. Particles of soup near the bottom of the pot get hot first. They have more energy so they spread out and become less dense. With lower density, these particles rise to the top of the pot (see Figure 18.8). By the time they reach the top of the pot they have cooled off. They have less energy to move apart, so they become denser. With greater density, the particles sink to the bottom of the pot, and the cycle repeats. This loop of moving particles is called a convection current. Convection currents move thermal energy through many fluids, including molten rock inside Earth, water in the oceans, and air in the atmosphere. In the atmosphere, convection currents create wind. You can see one way this happens in Figure 18.9. Land heats up and cools off faster than water because it has lower specific heat. Therefore, land is warmer during the day and cooler at night than water. Air close to the surface gains or loses heat as well. Warm air rises because it is less dense, and when it does, cool air moves in to take its place. This creates a convection current that carries air from the warmer to the cooler area. You can learn more about convection currents by watching "Convection" at this URL:  . 	fluid particles with more energy have greater density	false
Conduction is usually faster in liquids and certain solids than in gases. Materials that are good conductors of thermal energy are called thermal conductors. Metals are excellent thermal conductors. They have freely moving electrons that can transfer energy quickly and easily. Thats why the metal pot in Figure 18.5 soon gets hot all over, even though it gains thermal energy from the fire only at the bottom of the pot. In Figure 18.6, the metal heating element of the curling iron heats up almost instantly and quickly transfers energy to the strands of hair that it touches. 	metals are excellent thermal conductors because they have freely moving electrons	true
Convection is the transfer of thermal energy by particles moving through a fluid. Particles transfer energy by moving from warmer to cooler areas. Thats how energy is transferred in the soup in Figure 18.7. Particles of soup near the bottom of the pot get hot first. They have more energy so they spread out and become less dense. With lower density, these particles rise to the top of the pot (see Figure 18.8). By the time they reach the top of the pot they have cooled off. They have less energy to move apart, so they become denser. With greater density, the particles sink to the bottom of the pot, and the cycle repeats. This loop of moving particles is called a convection current. Convection currents move thermal energy through many fluids, including molten rock inside Earth, water in the oceans, and air in the atmosphere. In the atmosphere, convection currents create wind. You can see one way this happens in Figure 18.9. Land heats up and cools off faster than water because it has lower specific heat. Therefore, land is warmer during the day and cooler at night than water. Air close to the surface gains or loses heat as well. Warm air rises because it is less dense, and when it does, cool air moves in to take its place. This creates a convection current that carries air from the warmer to the cooler area. You can learn more about convection currents by watching "Convection" at this URL:  . 	a land breeze is an example of a convection current	true
Both conduction and convection transfer energy through matter. Radiation is the only way of transferring energy that doesnt require matter. Radiation is the transfer of energy by waves that can travel through empty space. When the waves reach objects, they transfer energy to the objects, causing them to warm up. This is how the suns energy reaches Earth and heats its surface (see Figure 18.10). Radiation is also how thermal energy from a campfire warms people nearby. You might be surprised to learn that all objects radiate thermal energy, including people. In fact, when a room is full of people, it may feel noticeably warmer because of all the thermal energy the people radiate! To learn more about thermal radiation, watch "Radiation" at the URL below. 	thermal energy is transferred from a space heater to a person in front of it by conduction	false
A combustion engine is a complex machine that burns fuel to produce thermal energy and then uses the energy to do work. Two basic types of combustion engines are external and internal combustion engines. 	the function of a thermostat is to transfer thermal energy	false
Warming homes and other buildings is an obvious way that thermal energy can be used. Two common types of home heating systems are hot-water and warm-air heating systems. Both types are described below. You can watch an animation showing how a solar heating system works at this URL: 	the water in a hotwater heating system is heated by a furnace	false
Warming homes and other buildings is an obvious way that thermal energy can be used. Two common types of home heating systems are hot-water and warm-air heating systems. Both types are described below. You can watch an animation showing how a solar heating system works at this URL: 	in a warmair heating system pipes carry thermal energy throughout the house	false
Its easy to see how thermal energy can be used to keep things warm. But did you know that thermal energy can also be used to keep things cool? Cooling systems such as air conditioners and refrigerators transfer thermal energy in order to keep homes and cars cool or to keep food cold. In a refrigerator, for example, thermal energy is transferred from the cool air inside the refrigerator to the warmer air in the kitchen. You read in this chapters "Transfer of Thermal Energy" lesson that thermal energy always moves from a warmer area to a cooler area, so how can it move from the cooler refrigerator to the warmer room? The answer is work. The refrigerator does work to transfer thermal energy in this way. Doing this work takes energy, which is usually provided by electricity. Figure 18.14 explains how a refrigerator does its work. For an animated demonstration of how a refrigerator works, go to this URL:  The key to how a refrigerator or other cooling system works is the refrigerant. A refrigerant is a substance, such as FreonTM, that has a low boiling point and changes between liquid and gaseous states as it passes through the cooling system. As a liquid, the refrigerant absorbs thermal energy from the cool air inside the refrigerator and changes to a gas. As a gas, it releases thermal energy to the warm air outside the refrigerator and changes back to a liquid. 	thermal energy from inside a refrigerator changes the refrigerant to a gas	true
A combustion engine is a complex machine that burns fuel to produce thermal energy and then uses the energy to do work. Two basic types of combustion engines are external and internal combustion engines. 	a combustion engine burns fuel to produce thermal energy	true
A combustion engine is a complex machine that burns fuel to produce thermal energy and then uses the energy to do work. Two basic types of combustion engines are external and internal combustion engines. 	in any combustion engine the engine does the work of moving a piston	true
Warming homes and other buildings is an obvious way that thermal energy can be used. Two common types of home heating systems are hot-water and warm-air heating systems. Both types are described below. You can watch an animation showing how a solar heating system works at this URL: 	in a warmair heating system warmair vents are always placed near the ceiling	false
Its easy to see how thermal energy can be used to keep things warm. But did you know that thermal energy can also be used to keep things cool? Cooling systems such as air conditioners and refrigerators transfer thermal energy in order to keep homes and cars cool or to keep food cold. In a refrigerator, for example, thermal energy is transferred from the cool air inside the refrigerator to the warmer air in the kitchen. You read in this chapters "Transfer of Thermal Energy" lesson that thermal energy always moves from a warmer area to a cooler area, so how can it move from the cooler refrigerator to the warmer room? The answer is work. The refrigerator does work to transfer thermal energy in this way. Doing this work takes energy, which is usually provided by electricity. Figure 18.14 explains how a refrigerator does its work. For an animated demonstration of how a refrigerator works, go to this URL:  The key to how a refrigerator or other cooling system works is the refrigerant. A refrigerant is a substance, such as FreonTM, that has a low boiling point and changes between liquid and gaseous states as it passes through the cooling system. As a liquid, the refrigerant absorbs thermal energy from the cool air inside the refrigerator and changes to a gas. As a gas, it releases thermal energy to the warm air outside the refrigerator and changes back to a liquid. 	an air conditioner is an example of a cooling system	true
Its easy to see how thermal energy can be used to keep things warm. But did you know that thermal energy can also be used to keep things cool? Cooling systems such as air conditioners and refrigerators transfer thermal energy in order to keep homes and cars cool or to keep food cold. In a refrigerator, for example, thermal energy is transferred from the cool air inside the refrigerator to the warmer air in the kitchen. You read in this chapters "Transfer of Thermal Energy" lesson that thermal energy always moves from a warmer area to a cooler area, so how can it move from the cooler refrigerator to the warmer room? The answer is work. The refrigerator does work to transfer thermal energy in this way. Doing this work takes energy, which is usually provided by electricity. Figure 18.14 explains how a refrigerator does its work. For an animated demonstration of how a refrigerator works, go to this URL:  The key to how a refrigerator or other cooling system works is the refrigerant. A refrigerant is a substance, such as FreonTM, that has a low boiling point and changes between liquid and gaseous states as it passes through the cooling system. As a liquid, the refrigerant absorbs thermal energy from the cool air inside the refrigerator and changes to a gas. As a gas, it releases thermal energy to the warm air outside the refrigerator and changes back to a liquid. 	refrigerant changes to a liquid in the condenser of a refrigerator	true
A combustion engine is a complex machine that burns fuel to produce thermal energy and then uses the energy to do work. Two basic types of combustion engines are external and internal combustion engines. 	steam ships have internal combustion engines	false
A combustion engine is a complex machine that burns fuel to produce thermal energy and then uses the energy to do work. Two basic types of combustion engines are external and internal combustion engines. 	the purpose of a radiator in a heating system is to produce thermal energy	false
A combustion engine is a complex machine that burns fuel to produce thermal energy and then uses the energy to do work. Two basic types of combustion engines are external and internal combustion engines. 	substance that absorbs and releases thermal energy in a cooling system	1.c
A warm-air heating system uses thermal energy to heat air. It then forces the warm air through a system of ducts. You can see a diagram of this type of heating system in Figure 18.13. Typically, the air is heated in a furnace that burns natural gas or heating oil. When the air is warm, a fan blows it through the ducts and out through vents that are located in each room. Warm air blowing out of a vent moves across the room, pushing cold air out of the way. The cold air enters an intake vent on the opposite side of the room and returns to the furnace with the help of another fan. In the furnace, the cold air is heated, and the cycle repeats. 	warm air moves through the ducts of heating system because of gravity	false
A warm-air heating system uses thermal energy to heat air. It then forces the warm air through a system of ducts. You can see a diagram of this type of heating system in Figure 18.13. Typically, the air is heated in a furnace that burns natural gas or heating oil. When the air is warm, a fan blows it through the ducts and out through vents that are located in each room. Warm air blowing out of a vent moves across the room, pushing cold air out of the way. The cold air enters an intake vent on the opposite side of the room and returns to the furnace with the help of another fan. In the furnace, the cold air is heated, and the cycle repeats. 	device in a heating system that controls the furnace or boiler	2.g
A combustion engine is a complex machine that burns fuel to produce thermal energy and then uses the energy to do work. Two basic types of combustion engines are external and internal combustion engines. 	complex machine that produces thermal energy outside the machine and uses the thermal energy to do	3.e
A combustion engine is a complex machine that burns fuel to produce thermal energy and then uses the energy to do work. Two basic types of combustion engines are external and internal combustion engines. 	the transfer of thermal energy can be used to keep things cool	true
A hot-water heating system uses thermal energy to heat water and then pumps the hot water throughout the building in a system of pipes and radiators. You can see a diagram of this type of heating system in Figure 18.12. Typically, the water is heated in a boiler that burns natural gas or heating oil. There is usually a radiator in each room that gets warm when the hot water flows through it. The radiator transfers thermal energy to the air around it by conduction and radiation. The warm air then circulates throughout the room in convection currents. The hot water cools as it flows through the system and transfers its thermal energy. When it finally returns to the boiler, it is heated again and the cycle repeats. 	heating system that includes a boiler pipes and radiators	4.f
A combustion engine is a complex machine that burns fuel to produce thermal energy and then uses the energy to do work. Two basic types of combustion engines are external and internal combustion engines. 	thermal energy naturally moves from a warmer area to a cooler area	true
A combustion engine is a complex machine that burns fuel to produce thermal energy and then uses the energy to do work. Two basic types of combustion engines are external and internal combustion engines. 	the piston of a combustion engine moves because the crankshaft turns	false
A combustion engine is a complex machine that burns fuel to produce thermal energy and then uses the energy to do work. Two basic types of combustion engines are external and internal combustion engines. 	complex machine that produces thermal energy inside the machine and uses the thermal energy to do work	5.a
Its easy to see how thermal energy can be used to keep things warm. But did you know that thermal energy can also be used to keep things cool? Cooling systems such as air conditioners and refrigerators transfer thermal energy in order to keep homes and cars cool or to keep food cold. In a refrigerator, for example, thermal energy is transferred from the cool air inside the refrigerator to the warmer air in the kitchen. You read in this chapters "Transfer of Thermal Energy" lesson that thermal energy always moves from a warmer area to a cooler area, so how can it move from the cooler refrigerator to the warmer room? The answer is work. The refrigerator does work to transfer thermal energy in this way. Doing this work takes energy, which is usually provided by electricity. Figure 18.14 explains how a refrigerator does its work. For an animated demonstration of how a refrigerator works, go to this URL:  The key to how a refrigerator or other cooling system works is the refrigerant. A refrigerant is a substance, such as FreonTM, that has a low boiling point and changes between liquid and gaseous states as it passes through the cooling system. As a liquid, the refrigerant absorbs thermal energy from the cool air inside the refrigerator and changes to a gas. As a gas, it releases thermal energy to the warm air outside the refrigerator and changes back to a liquid. 	refrigerator or air conditioner	6.b
A warm-air heating system uses thermal energy to heat air. It then forces the warm air through a system of ducts. You can see a diagram of this type of heating system in Figure 18.13. Typically, the air is heated in a furnace that burns natural gas or heating oil. When the air is warm, a fan blows it through the ducts and out through vents that are located in each room. Warm air blowing out of a vent moves across the room, pushing cold air out of the way. The cold air enters an intake vent on the opposite side of the room and returns to the furnace with the help of another fan. In the furnace, the cold air is heated, and the cycle repeats. 	heating system that includes a furnace ducts and vents	7.d
A mechanical wave is a disturbance in matter that transfers energy from place to place. A mechanical wave starts when matter is disturbed. An example of a mechanical wave is pictured in Figure 19.1. A drop of water falls into a pond. This disturbs the water in the pond. What happens next? The disturbance travels outward from the drop in all directions. This is the wave. A source of energy is needed to start a mechanical wave. In this case, the energy comes from the falling drop of water. 	a mechanical wave starts with a disturbance in matter	true
There are three types of mechanical waves. They differ in how they travel through a medium. The three types are transverse, longitudinal, and surface waves. All three types are described in detail below. 	particles of matter actually travel along with a mechanical wave	false
There are three types of mechanical waves. They differ in how they travel through a medium. The three types are transverse, longitudinal, and surface waves. All three types are described in detail below. 	transverse waves travel only through solid matter	false
There are three types of mechanical waves. They differ in how they travel through a medium. The three types are transverse, longitudinal, and surface waves. All three types are described in detail below. 	ocean waves travel deep below the surface of the water	false
Earthquakes cause longitudinal waves as well as transverse waves. The disturbance that causes an earthquake sends longitudinal waves through underground rocks in all directions from the disturbance. Earthquake waves that travel this way are called primary, or P, waves. They are illustrated in Figure 19.7. 	earthquakes cause longitudinal waves	true
The energy of a mechanical wave can travel only through matter. This matter is called the medium (plural, media). The medium in Figure 19.1 is a liquid the water in the pond. But the medium of a mechanical wave can be any state of matter, including a solid or a gas. Its important to note that particles of matter in the medium dont actually travel along with the wave. Only the energy travels. The particles of the medium just vibrate, or move back-and- forth or up-and-down in one spot, always returning to their original positions. As the particles vibrate, they pass the energy of the disturbance to the particles next to them, which pass the energy to the particles next to them, and so on. 	the medium of a mechanical wave must be a solid or liquid	false
A transverse wave can be characterized by the high and low points reached by particles of the medium as the wave passes through. This is illustrated in Figure 19.3. The high points are called crests, and the low points are called troughs. 	in a surface wave particles of the medium move only up and down	false
A surface wave is a wave that travels along the surface of a medium. It combines a transverse wave and a longitudinal wave. Ocean waves are surface waves. They travel on the surface of the water between the ocean and the air. In a surface wave, particles of the medium move up and down as well as back and forth. This gives them an overall circular motion. This is illustrated in Figure 19.8 and at the URL below. MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  In deep water, particles of water just move in circles. They dont actually move closer to shore with the energy of the waves. However, near the shore where the water is shallow, the waves behave differently. They start to drag on the bottom, creating friction (see Figure 19.9). The friction slows down the bottoms of the waves, while the tops of the waves keep moving at the same speed. This causes the waves to get steeper until they topple over and crash on the shore. The crashing waves carry water onto the shore as surf. 	ocean waves crash on shore when the bottoms of the waves slow down due to friction	true
A transverse wave can be characterized by the high and low points reached by particles of the medium as the wave passes through. This is illustrated in Figure 19.3. The high points are called crests, and the low points are called troughs. 	in a surface wave particles of matter move in a circular motion	true
There are three types of mechanical waves. They differ in how they travel through a medium. The three types are transverse, longitudinal, and surface waves. All three types are described in detail below. 	all waves transfer energy from one place to another	true
Earthquakes cause longitudinal waves as well as transverse waves. The disturbance that causes an earthquake sends longitudinal waves through underground rocks in all directions from the disturbance. Earthquake waves that travel this way are called primary, or P, waves. They are illustrated in Figure 19.7. 	a primary p wave is a longitudinal wave	true
There are three types of mechanical waves. They differ in how they travel through a medium. The three types are transverse, longitudinal, and surface waves. All three types are described in detail below. 	all waves must travel through matter	false
There are three types of mechanical waves. They differ in how they travel through a medium. The three types are transverse, longitudinal, and surface waves. All three types are described in detail below. 	all mechanical waves are either transverse or longitudinal waves	false
There are three types of mechanical waves. They differ in how they travel through a medium. The three types are transverse, longitudinal, and surface waves. All three types are described in detail below. 	some waves do not require a medium	true
A mechanical wave is a disturbance in matter that transfers energy from place to place. A mechanical wave starts when matter is disturbed. An example of a mechanical wave is pictured in Figure 19.1. A drop of water falls into a pond. This disturbs the water in the pond. What happens next? The disturbance travels outward from the drop in all directions. This is the wave. A source of energy is needed to start a mechanical wave. In this case, the energy comes from the falling drop of water. 	a source of energy is needed to start a mechanical wave	true
A mechanical wave is a disturbance in matter that transfers energy from place to place. A mechanical wave starts when matter is disturbed. An example of a mechanical wave is pictured in Figure 19.1. A drop of water falls into a pond. This disturbs the water in the pond. What happens next? The disturbance travels outward from the drop in all directions. This is the wave. A source of energy is needed to start a mechanical wave. In this case, the energy comes from the falling drop of water. 	disturbance in matter that transfers energy from place to place	1.c
A longitudinal wave can be characterized by the compressions and rarefactions of the medium. This is illustrated in Figure 19.6. Compressions are the places where the coils are crowded together, and rarefactions are the places where the coils are spread apart. 	part of a longitudinal wave where particles of the medium are spread farthest apart	2.f
A transverse wave can be characterized by the high and low points reached by particles of the medium as the wave passes through. This is illustrated in Figure 19.3. The high points are called crests, and the low points are called troughs. 	wave in which particles of the medium vibrate at right angles to the direction that the wave travels	3.g
There are three types of mechanical waves. They differ in how they travel through a medium. The three types are transverse, longitudinal, and surface waves. All three types are described in detail below. 	combined transverse and longitudinal wave	4.e
A transverse wave can be characterized by the high and low points reached by particles of the medium as the wave passes through. This is illustrated in Figure 19.3. The high points are called crests, and the low points are called troughs. 	part of a transverse wave where particles of the medium are lowest	5.b
A transverse wave can be characterized by the high and low points reached by particles of the medium as the wave passes through. This is illustrated in Figure 19.3. The high points are called crests, and the low points are called troughs. 	wave in which particles of the medium vibrate in the same direction that the wave travels	6.a
A mechanical wave is a disturbance in matter that transfers energy from place to place. A mechanical wave starts when matter is disturbed. An example of a mechanical wave is pictured in Figure 19.1. A drop of water falls into a pond. This disturbs the water in the pond. What happens next? The disturbance travels outward from the drop in all directions. This is the wave. A source of energy is needed to start a mechanical wave. In this case, the energy comes from the falling drop of water. 	matter through which a mechanical wave travels	7. d
The height of a wave is its amplitude. Another measure of wave size is wavelength. Both wave amplitude and wave- length are described in detail below. Figure 19.11 shows these wave measures for both transverse and longitudinal waves. You can also simulate waves with different amplitudes and wavelengths by doing the interactive animation at this URL: http://sci-culture.com/advancedpoll/GCSE/sine%20wave%20simulator.html . 	the less compressed particles of matter become in a longitudinal wave the greater the waves amplitude	false
Another important measure of wave size is wavelength. Wavelength is the distance between two corresponding points on adjacent waves (see Figure 19.11). Wavelength can be measured as the distance between two adjacent crests of a transverse wave or two adjacent compressions of a longitudinal wave. It is usually measured in meters. Wavelength is related to the energy of a wave. Short-wavelength waves have more energy than long-wavelength waves of the same amplitude. You can see examples of waves with shorter and longer wavelengths in Figure 19.12. 	the distance between two adjacent compressions of a longitudinal wave is its wavelength	true
The number of waves that pass a fixed point in a given amount of time is wave frequency. Wave frequency can be measured by counting the number of crests or compressions that pass the point in 1 second or other time period. The higher the number is, the greater is the frequency of the wave. The SI unit for wave frequency is the hertz (Hz), where 1 hertz equals 1 wave passing a fixed point in 1 second. Figure 19.13 shows high-frequency and low- frequency transverse waves. You can simulate transverse waves with different frequencies at this URL: http://zonal The frequency of a wave is the same as the frequency of the vibrations that caused the wave. For example, to generate a higher-frequency wave in a rope, you must move the rope up and down more quickly. This takes more energy, so a higher-frequency wave has more energy than a lower-frequency wave with the same amplitude. 	the frequency of a wave is the same as the frequency of the vibrations that caused the wave	true
The height of a wave is its amplitude. Another measure of wave size is wavelength. Both wave amplitude and wave- length are described in detail below. Figure 19.11 shows these wave measures for both transverse and longitudinal waves. You can also simulate waves with different amplitudes and wavelengths by doing the interactive animation at this URL: http://sci-culture.com/advancedpoll/GCSE/sine%20wave%20simulator.html . 	wave speed measures the same thing as wave frequency	false
Assume that you move one end of a rope up and down just once. How long will take the wave to travel down the rope to the other end? This depends on the speed of the wave. Wave speed is how far the wave travels in a given amount of time, such as how many meters it travels per second. Wave speed is not the same thing as wave frequency, but it is related to frequency and also to wavelength. This equation shows how the three factors are related: Speed = Wavelength  Frequency In this equation, wavelength is measured in meters and frequency is measured in hertz, or number of waves per second. Therefore, wave speed is given in meters per second. The equation for wave speed can be used to calculate the speed of a wave when both wavelength and wave frequency are known. Consider an ocean wave with a wavelength of 3 meters and a frequency of 1 hertz. The speed of the wave is: Speed = 3 m  1 wave/s = 3 m/s You Try It! Problem: Jera made a wave in a spring by pushing and pulling on one end. The wavelength is 0.1 m, and the wave frequency is 0.2 m/s. What is the speed of the wave? If you want more practice calculating wave speed from wavelength and frequency, try the problems at this URL: http The equation for wave speed (above) can be rewritten as: Frequency = Speed Speed or Wavelength = Wavelength Frequency Therefore, if you know the speed of a wave and either the wavelength or wave frequency, you can calculate the missing value. For example, suppose that a wave is traveling at a speed of 2 meters per second and has a wavelength of 1 meter. Then the frequency of the wave is: Frequency = 2 m/s = 2 waves/s, or 2 Hz 1m You Try It! Problem: A wave is traveling at a speed of 2 m/s and has a frequency of 2 Hz. What is its wavelength? 	wavelength equals wave speed multiplied by wave frequency	false
Wave amplitude is the maximum distance the particles of a medium move from their resting position when a wave passes through. The resting position is where the particles would be in the absence of a wave. In a transverse wave, wave amplitude is the height of each crest above the resting position. The higher the crests are, the greater the amplitude. In a longitudinal wave, amplitude is a measure of how compressed particles of the medium become when the wave passes through. The closer together the particles are, the greater the amplitude. What determines a waves amplitude? It depends on the energy of the disturbance that causes the wave. A wave caused by a disturbance with more energy has greater amplitude. Imagine dropping a small pebble into a pond of still water. Tiny ripples will move out from the disturbance in concentric circles, like those in Figure 19.1. The ripples are low-amplitude waves. Now imagine throwing a big boulder into the pond. Very large waves will be generated by the disturbance. These waves are high-amplitude waves. 	the resting position of particles in a longitudinal wave is where the particles are most spread out	false
Wave amplitude is the maximum distance the particles of a medium move from their resting position when a wave passes through. The resting position is where the particles would be in the absence of a wave. In a transverse wave, wave amplitude is the height of each crest above the resting position. The higher the crests are, the greater the amplitude. In a longitudinal wave, amplitude is a measure of how compressed particles of the medium become when the wave passes through. The closer together the particles are, the greater the amplitude. What determines a waves amplitude? It depends on the energy of the disturbance that causes the wave. A wave caused by a disturbance with more energy has greater amplitude. Imagine dropping a small pebble into a pond of still water. Tiny ripples will move out from the disturbance in concentric circles, like those in Figure 19.1. The ripples are low-amplitude waves. Now imagine throwing a big boulder into the pond. Very large waves will be generated by the disturbance. These waves are high-amplitude waves. 	a wave caused by a disturbance with greater energy has greater amplitude	true
Assume that you move one end of a rope up and down just once. How long will take the wave to travel down the rope to the other end? This depends on the speed of the wave. Wave speed is how far the wave travels in a given amount of time, such as how many meters it travels per second. Wave speed is not the same thing as wave frequency, but it is related to frequency and also to wavelength. This equation shows how the three factors are related: Speed = Wavelength  Frequency In this equation, wavelength is measured in meters and frequency is measured in hertz, or number of waves per second. Therefore, wave speed is given in meters per second. The equation for wave speed can be used to calculate the speed of a wave when both wavelength and wave frequency are known. Consider an ocean wave with a wavelength of 3 meters and a frequency of 1 hertz. The speed of the wave is: Speed = 3 m  1 wave/s = 3 m/s You Try It! Problem: Jera made a wave in a spring by pushing and pulling on one end. The wavelength is 0.1 m, and the wave frequency is 0.2 m/s. What is the speed of the wave? If you want more practice calculating wave speed from wavelength and frequency, try the problems at this URL: http The equation for wave speed (above) can be rewritten as: Frequency = Speed Speed or Wavelength = Wavelength Frequency Therefore, if you know the speed of a wave and either the wavelength or wave frequency, you can calculate the missing value. For example, suppose that a wave is traveling at a speed of 2 meters per second and has a wavelength of 1 meter. Then the frequency of the wave is: Frequency = 2 m/s = 2 waves/s, or 2 Hz 1m You Try It! Problem: A wave is traveling at a speed of 2 m/s and has a frequency of 2 Hz. What is its wavelength? 	if you know the speed and wavelength of a wave you can calculate its frequency	true
The speed of most waves depends on the medium through which they are traveling. Generally, waves travel fastest through solids and slowest through gases. Thats because particles are closest together in solids and farthest apart in gases. When particles are farther apart, it takes longer for the energy of the disturbance to pass from particle to particle. 	waves generally travel most slowly in gases	true
The number of waves that pass a fixed point in a given amount of time is wave frequency. Wave frequency can be measured by counting the number of crests or compressions that pass the point in 1 second or other time period. The higher the number is, the greater is the frequency of the wave. The SI unit for wave frequency is the hertz (Hz), where 1 hertz equals 1 wave passing a fixed point in 1 second. Figure 19.13 shows high-frequency and low- frequency transverse waves. You can simulate transverse waves with different frequencies at this URL: http://zonal The frequency of a wave is the same as the frequency of the vibrations that caused the wave. For example, to generate a higher-frequency wave in a rope, you must move the rope up and down more quickly. This takes more energy, so a higher-frequency wave has more energy than a lower-frequency wave with the same amplitude. 	a wave with a higher frequency always has a greater speed than a wave with a lower frequency	false
The height of a wave is its amplitude. Another measure of wave size is wavelength. Both wave amplitude and wave- length are described in detail below. Figure 19.11 shows these wave measures for both transverse and longitudinal waves. You can also simulate waves with different amplitudes and wavelengths by doing the interactive animation at this URL: http://sci-culture.com/advancedpoll/GCSE/sine%20wave%20simulator.html . 	one measure of wave size is wave frequency	false
Wave amplitude is the maximum distance the particles of a medium move from their resting position when a wave passes through. The resting position is where the particles would be in the absence of a wave. In a transverse wave, wave amplitude is the height of each crest above the resting position. The higher the crests are, the greater the amplitude. In a longitudinal wave, amplitude is a measure of how compressed particles of the medium become when the wave passes through. The closer together the particles are, the greater the amplitude. What determines a waves amplitude? It depends on the energy of the disturbance that causes the wave. A wave caused by a disturbance with more energy has greater amplitude. Imagine dropping a small pebble into a pond of still water. Tiny ripples will move out from the disturbance in concentric circles, like those in Figure 19.1. The ripples are low-amplitude waves. Now imagine throwing a big boulder into the pond. Very large waves will be generated by the disturbance. These waves are high-amplitude waves. 	the resting position of a transverse wave is called a trough	false
The height of a wave is its amplitude. Another measure of wave size is wavelength. Both wave amplitude and wave- length are described in detail below. Figure 19.11 shows these wave measures for both transverse and longitudinal waves. You can also simulate waves with different amplitudes and wavelengths by doing the interactive animation at this URL: http://sci-culture.com/advancedpoll/GCSE/sine%20wave%20simulator.html . 	if you know only a waves amplitude and wavelength you can calculate its speed	false
The height of a wave is its amplitude. Another measure of wave size is wavelength. Both wave amplitude and wave- length are described in detail below. Figure 19.11 shows these wave measures for both transverse and longitudinal waves. You can also simulate waves with different amplitudes and wavelengths by doing the interactive animation at this URL: http://sci-culture.com/advancedpoll/GCSE/sine%20wave%20simulator.html . 	wave speed and wavelength have an inverse relationship	false
The height of a wave is its amplitude. Another measure of wave size is wavelength. Both wave amplitude and wave- length are described in detail below. Figure 19.11 shows these wave measures for both transverse and longitudinal waves. You can also simulate waves with different amplitudes and wavelengths by doing the interactive animation at this URL: http://sci-culture.com/advancedpoll/GCSE/sine%20wave%20simulator.html . 	a tsunami is an ocean wave with an unusually great amplitude	true
Wave amplitude is the maximum distance the particles of a medium move from their resting position when a wave passes through. The resting position is where the particles would be in the absence of a wave. In a transverse wave, wave amplitude is the height of each crest above the resting position. The higher the crests are, the greater the amplitude. In a longitudinal wave, amplitude is a measure of how compressed particles of the medium become when the wave passes through. The closer together the particles are, the greater the amplitude. What determines a waves amplitude? It depends on the energy of the disturbance that causes the wave. A wave caused by a disturbance with more energy has greater amplitude. Imagine dropping a small pebble into a pond of still water. Tiny ripples will move out from the disturbance in concentric circles, like those in Figure 19.1. The ripples are low-amplitude waves. Now imagine throwing a big boulder into the pond. Very large waves will be generated by the disturbance. These waves are high-amplitude waves. 	maximum distance the particles of a medium move from their resting position	1.c
Imagine making transverse waves in a rope, like the waves in Figure 19.2. You tie one end of the rope to a doorknob or other fixed point and move the other end up and down with your hand. You can move the rope up and down slowly or quickly. How quickly you move the rope determines the frequency of the waves. 	number of waves that pass a fixed point in a given amount of time	2.e
Assume that you move one end of a rope up and down just once. How long will take the wave to travel down the rope to the other end? This depends on the speed of the wave. Wave speed is how far the wave travels in a given amount of time, such as how many meters it travels per second. Wave speed is not the same thing as wave frequency, but it is related to frequency and also to wavelength. This equation shows how the three factors are related: Speed = Wavelength  Frequency In this equation, wavelength is measured in meters and frequency is measured in hertz, or number of waves per second. Therefore, wave speed is given in meters per second. The equation for wave speed can be used to calculate the speed of a wave when both wavelength and wave frequency are known. Consider an ocean wave with a wavelength of 3 meters and a frequency of 1 hertz. The speed of the wave is: Speed = 3 m  1 wave/s = 3 m/s You Try It! Problem: Jera made a wave in a spring by pushing and pulling on one end. The wavelength is 0.1 m, and the wave frequency is 0.2 m/s. What is the speed of the wave? If you want more practice calculating wave speed from wavelength and frequency, try the problems at this URL: http The equation for wave speed (above) can be rewritten as: Frequency = Speed Speed or Wavelength = Wavelength Frequency Therefore, if you know the speed of a wave and either the wavelength or wave frequency, you can calculate the missing value. For example, suppose that a wave is traveling at a speed of 2 meters per second and has a wavelength of 1 meter. Then the frequency of the wave is: Frequency = 2 m/s = 2 waves/s, or 2 Hz 1m You Try It! Problem: A wave is traveling at a speed of 2 m/s and has a frequency of 2 Hz. What is its wavelength? 	how far a wave travels in a given amount of time	3.g
Wave amplitude is the maximum distance the particles of a medium move from their resting position when a wave passes through. The resting position is where the particles would be in the absence of a wave. In a transverse wave, wave amplitude is the height of each crest above the resting position. The higher the crests are, the greater the amplitude. In a longitudinal wave, amplitude is a measure of how compressed particles of the medium become when the wave passes through. The closer together the particles are, the greater the amplitude. What determines a waves amplitude? It depends on the energy of the disturbance that causes the wave. A wave caused by a disturbance with more energy has greater amplitude. Imagine dropping a small pebble into a pond of still water. Tiny ripples will move out from the disturbance in concentric circles, like those in Figure 19.1. The ripples are low-amplitude waves. Now imagine throwing a big boulder into the pond. Very large waves will be generated by the disturbance. These waves are high-amplitude waves. 	highest point reached by particles of the medium in a transverse wave	4.f
Another important measure of wave size is wavelength. Wavelength is the distance between two corresponding points on adjacent waves (see Figure 19.11). Wavelength can be measured as the distance between two adjacent crests of a transverse wave or two adjacent compressions of a longitudinal wave. It is usually measured in meters. Wavelength is related to the energy of a wave. Short-wavelength waves have more energy than long-wavelength waves of the same amplitude. You can see examples of waves with shorter and longer wavelengths in Figure 19.12. 	distance between two corresponding points on adjacent waves	5.b
Wave amplitude is the maximum distance the particles of a medium move from their resting position when a wave passes through. The resting position is where the particles would be in the absence of a wave. In a transverse wave, wave amplitude is the height of each crest above the resting position. The higher the crests are, the greater the amplitude. In a longitudinal wave, amplitude is a measure of how compressed particles of the medium become when the wave passes through. The closer together the particles are, the greater the amplitude. What determines a waves amplitude? It depends on the energy of the disturbance that causes the wave. A wave caused by a disturbance with more energy has greater amplitude. Imagine dropping a small pebble into a pond of still water. Tiny ripples will move out from the disturbance in concentric circles, like those in Figure 19.1. The ripples are low-amplitude waves. Now imagine throwing a big boulder into the pond. Very large waves will be generated by the disturbance. These waves are high-amplitude waves. 	location of particles of the medium in the absence of a wave	6.d
The number of waves that pass a fixed point in a given amount of time is wave frequency. Wave frequency can be measured by counting the number of crests or compressions that pass the point in 1 second or other time period. The higher the number is, the greater is the frequency of the wave. The SI unit for wave frequency is the hertz (Hz), where 1 hertz equals 1 wave passing a fixed point in 1 second. Figure 19.13 shows high-frequency and low- frequency transverse waves. You can simulate transverse waves with different frequencies at this URL: http://zonal The frequency of a wave is the same as the frequency of the vibrations that caused the wave. For example, to generate a higher-frequency wave in a rope, you must move the rope up and down more quickly. This takes more energy, so a higher-frequency wave has more energy than a lower-frequency wave with the same amplitude. 	si unit for wave frequency	7.a
Constructive interference occurs when the crests of one wave overlap the crests of the other wave. This is illustrated in Figure 19.20. As the waves pass through each other, the crests combine to produce a wave with greater amplitude. You can see an animation of constructive interference at this URL: http://phys23p.sl.psu.edu/phys_anim/waves/em 	reflection occurs only with sound waves	false
When a wave is reflected straight back from an obstacle, the reflected wave interferes with the original wave and creates a standing wave. This is a wave that appears to be standing still. A standing wave occurs because of a combination of constructive and destructive interference between a wave and its reflected wave. You can see animations of standing waves at the URLs below. http://skullsinthestars.com/2008/05/04/classic-science-paper-otto-wieners-experiment-1890/  Its easy to generate a standing wave in a rope by tying one end to a fixed object and moving the other end up and down. When waves reach the fixed object, they are reflected back. The original wave and the reflected wave interfere to produce a standing wave. Try it yourself and see if the wave appears to stand still. 	all reflected waves appear to be standing still	false
Constructive interference occurs when the crests of one wave overlap the crests of the other wave. This is illustrated in Figure 19.20. As the waves pass through each other, the crests combine to produce a wave with greater amplitude. You can see an animation of constructive interference at this URL: http://phys23p.sl.psu.edu/phys_anim/waves/em 	the angle of incidence is always greater than the angle of reflection	false
An echo is an example of wave reflection. Reflection occurs when waves bounce back from a barrier they cannot pass through. Reflection can happen with any type of waves, not just sound waves. For example, Figure 19.15 shows the reflection of ocean waves off a rocky coast. Light waves can also be reflected. In fact, thats how we see most objects. Light from a light source, such as the sun or a light bulb, shines on the object and some of the light is reflected. When the reflected light enters our eyes, we can see the object. Reflected waves have the same speed and frequency as the original waves before they were reflected. However, the direction of the reflected waves is different. When waves strike an obstacle head on, the reflected waves bounce straight back in the direction they came from. When waves strike an obstacle at any other angle, they bounce back at the same angle but in a different direction. This is illustrated in Figure 19.16. 	reflected waves have the same speed as the original waves before they were reflected	true
Did you ever notice that when youre walking down a street, you can hear sounds around the corners of buildings? Figure 19.18 shows why this happens. As you can see from the figure, sound waves spread out and travel around obstacles. This is called diffraction. It also occurs when waves pass through an opening in an obstacle. All waves may be diffracted, but it is more pronounced in some types of waves than others. For example, sound waves bend around corners much more than light does. Thats why you can hear but not see around corners. For a given type of waves, such as sound waves, how much the waves diffract depends on two factors: the size of the obstacle or opening in the obstacle and the wavelength. This is illustrated in Figure 19.19. Diffraction is minor if the length of the obstacle or opening is greater than the wavelength. Diffraction is major if the length of the obstacle or opening is less than the wavelength. 	diffraction is more pronounced with sound waves than light waves	true
Refraction is another way that waves interact with matter. Refraction occurs when waves bend as they enter a new medium at an angle. You can see an example of refraction in Figure 19.17. Light bends when it passes from air to water. The bending of the light causes the pencil to appear broken. Why do waves bend as they enter a new medium? Waves usually travel at different speeds in different media. For example, light travels more slowly in water than air. This causes it to refract when it passes from air to water. 	diffraction occurs because waves travel at different speeds in different media	false
Constructive interference occurs when the crests of one wave overlap the crests of the other wave. This is illustrated in Figure 19.20. As the waves pass through each other, the crests combine to produce a wave with greater amplitude. You can see an animation of constructive interference at this URL: http://phys23p.sl.psu.edu/phys_anim/waves/em 	wave interference occurs whenever waves enter a new medium	false
Constructive interference occurs when the crests of one wave overlap the crests of the other wave. This is illustrated in Figure 19.20. As the waves pass through each other, the crests combine to produce a wave with greater amplitude. You can see an animation of constructive interference at this URL: http://phys23p.sl.psu.edu/phys_anim/waves/em 	wave interference occurs only when a wave is reflected	false
Did you ever notice that when youre walking down a street, you can hear sounds around the corners of buildings? Figure 19.18 shows why this happens. As you can see from the figure, sound waves spread out and travel around obstacles. This is called diffraction. It also occurs when waves pass through an opening in an obstacle. All waves may be diffracted, but it is more pronounced in some types of waves than others. For example, sound waves bend around corners much more than light does. Thats why you can hear but not see around corners. For a given type of waves, such as sound waves, how much the waves diffract depends on two factors: the size of the obstacle or opening in the obstacle and the wavelength. This is illustrated in Figure 19.19. Diffraction is minor if the length of the obstacle or opening is greater than the wavelength. Diffraction is major if the length of the obstacle or opening is less than the wavelength. 	you can hear sounds around the corner of a building because the sound waves are refracted	false
Constructive interference occurs when the crests of one wave overlap the crests of the other wave. This is illustrated in Figure 19.20. As the waves pass through each other, the crests combine to produce a wave with greater amplitude. You can see an animation of constructive interference at this URL: http://phys23p.sl.psu.edu/phys_anim/waves/em 	light waves refract when they pass from air to water	true
Destructive interference occurs when the crests of one wave overlap the troughs of another wave. This is illustrated in Figure 19.21. As the waves pass through each other, the crests and troughs cancel each other out to produce a wave with less amplitude. You can see an animation of destructive interference at this URL: http://phys23p.sl.psu.ed 	destructive interference decreases the amplitude of waves	true
When a wave is reflected straight back from an obstacle, the reflected wave interferes with the original wave and creates a standing wave. This is a wave that appears to be standing still. A standing wave occurs because of a combination of constructive and destructive interference between a wave and its reflected wave. You can see animations of standing waves at the URLs below. http://skullsinthestars.com/2008/05/04/classic-science-paper-otto-wieners-experiment-1890/  Its easy to generate a standing wave in a rope by tying one end to a fixed object and moving the other end up and down. When waves reach the fixed object, they are reflected back. The original wave and the reflected wave interfere to produce a standing wave. Try it yourself and see if the wave appears to stand still. 	a standing wave forms when a wave is refracted	false
Destructive interference occurs when the crests of one wave overlap the troughs of another wave. This is illustrated in Figure 19.21. As the waves pass through each other, the crests and troughs cancel each other out to produce a wave with less amplitude. You can see an animation of destructive interference at this URL: http://phys23p.sl.psu.ed 	interference occurs only when the crests of one wave overlap with the troughs of another wave	false
When a wave is reflected straight back from an obstacle, the reflected wave interferes with the original wave and creates a standing wave. This is a wave that appears to be standing still. A standing wave occurs because of a combination of constructive and destructive interference between a wave and its reflected wave. You can see animations of standing waves at the URLs below. http://skullsinthestars.com/2008/05/04/classic-science-paper-otto-wieners-experiment-1890/  Its easy to generate a standing wave in a rope by tying one end to a fixed object and moving the other end up and down. When waves reach the fixed object, they are reflected back. The original wave and the reflected wave interfere to produce a standing wave. Try it yourself and see if the wave appears to stand still. 	a standing wave occurs when a wave is reflected straight back from an obstacle	true
Constructive interference occurs when the crests of one wave overlap the crests of the other wave. This is illustrated in Figure 19.20. As the waves pass through each other, the crests combine to produce a wave with greater amplitude. You can see an animation of constructive interference at this URL: http://phys23p.sl.psu.edu/phys_anim/waves/em 	wave interference always changes the speed of a wave	false
Refraction is another way that waves interact with matter. Refraction occurs when waves bend as they enter a new medium at an angle. You can see an example of refraction in Figure 19.17. Light bends when it passes from air to water. The bending of the light causes the pencil to appear broken. Why do waves bend as they enter a new medium? Waves usually travel at different speeds in different media. For example, light travels more slowly in water than air. This causes it to refract when it passes from air to water. 	change in direction of waves as they enter a new medium at an angle	1.e
Waves interact with matter in several ways. The interactions occur when waves pass from one medium to another. Besides bouncing back like an echo, waves may bend or spread out when they strike a new medium. These three ways that waves may interact with matter are called reflection, refraction, and diffraction. Each type of interaction is described in detail below. For animations of the three types of wave interactions, go to this URL: 	bouncing back of waves from a barrier	2.c
Waves interact with matter in several ways. The interactions occur when waves pass from one medium to another. Besides bouncing back like an echo, waves may bend or spread out when they strike a new medium. These three ways that waves may interact with matter are called reflection, refraction, and diffraction. Each type of interaction is described in detail below. For animations of the three types of wave interactions, go to this URL: 	any interaction of waves with other waves	3.g
Constructive interference occurs when the crests of one wave overlap the crests of the other wave. This is illustrated in Figure 19.20. As the waves pass through each other, the crests combine to produce a wave with greater amplitude. You can see an animation of constructive interference at this URL: http://phys23p.sl.psu.edu/phys_anim/waves/em 	situation in which crests of one wave overlap crests of another wave	4.d
Waves interact with matter in several ways. The interactions occur when waves pass from one medium to another. Besides bouncing back like an echo, waves may bend or spread out when they strike a new medium. These three ways that waves may interact with matter are called reflection, refraction, and diffraction. Each type of interaction is described in detail below. For animations of the three types of wave interactions, go to this URL: 	any interaction of waves with matter	5.b
Constructive interference occurs when the crests of one wave overlap the crests of the other wave. This is illustrated in Figure 19.20. As the waves pass through each other, the crests combine to produce a wave with greater amplitude. You can see an animation of constructive interference at this URL: http://phys23p.sl.psu.edu/phys_anim/waves/em 	spreading out of waves as they pass around a barrier	6.a
Destructive interference occurs when the crests of one wave overlap the troughs of another wave. This is illustrated in Figure 19.21. As the waves pass through each other, the crests and troughs cancel each other out to produce a wave with less amplitude. You can see an animation of destructive interference at this URL: http://phys23p.sl.psu.ed 	situation in which crests of one wave overlap troughs of another wave	7.f
All sounds begin with vibrating matter. It could be the ground vibrating when a tree comes crashing down. Or it could be guitar strings vibrating when they are plucked. You can see a guitar string vibrating in Figure 20.2. The vibrating string repeatedly pushes against the air particles next to it. The pressure of the vibrating string causes these air particles to vibrate. The air particles alternately push together and spread apart. This starts waves of vibrations that travel through the air in all directions away from the strings. The vibrations pass through the air as longitudinal waves, with individual air particles vibrating back and forth in the same direction that the waves travel. You can see an animation of sound waves moving through air at this URL: 	all sounds begin with vibrations in matter	true
Sound has certain characteristic properties because of the way sound energy travels in waves. Properties of sound include speed, loudness, and pitch. 	sound waves generally travel most quickly through gases	false
Why does a tree make sound when it crashes to the ground? How does the sound reach peoples ears if they happen to be in the forest? And in general, how do sounds get started, and how do they travel? Keep reading to find out. 	sounds can travel through air and water but not through solids	false
Sound has certain characteristic properties because of the way sound energy travels in waves. Properties of sound include speed, loudness, and pitch. 	sound waves travel more quickly in warm air than cold air	true
Sound has certain characteristic properties because of the way sound energy travels in waves. Properties of sound include speed, loudness, and pitch. 	the amount of water vapor in the air affects the speed of sound through air	true
Why does a tree make sound when it crashes to the ground? How does the sound reach peoples ears if they happen to be in the forest? And in general, how do sounds get started, and how do they travel? Keep reading to find out. 	sounds that are too high in frequency for humans to hear are called infrasound	false
Sound has certain characteristic properties because of the way sound energy travels in waves. Properties of sound include speed, loudness, and pitch. 	as distance from a sound source increases the area covered by the sound waves decreases	false
Sound has certain characteristic properties because of the way sound energy travels in waves. Properties of sound include speed, loudness, and pitch. 	as the decibel level of sounds gets higher the pitch of the sounds always gets higher	false
Sound has certain characteristic properties because of the way sound energy travels in waves. Properties of sound include speed, loudness, and pitch. 	the intensity of sound waves is the same regardless of distance from the sound source	false
Why does a tree make sound when it crashes to the ground? How does the sound reach peoples ears if they happen to be in the forest? And in general, how do sounds get started, and how do they travel? Keep reading to find out. 	some animals can hear sounds with frequencies as high as 100000 hz	true
Sound has certain characteristic properties because of the way sound energy travels in waves. Properties of sound include speed, loudness, and pitch. 	how loud or soft a sound seems to a listener	1. a
Why does a tree make sound when it crashes to the ground? How does the sound reach peoples ears if they happen to be in the forest? And in general, how do sounds get started, and how do they travel? Keep reading to find out. 	sounds with frequencies above 20000 hertz	2.f
Sound has certain characteristic properties because of the way sound energy travels in waves. Properties of sound include speed, loudness, and pitch. 	unit of sound intensity	3.d
Sound has certain characteristic properties because of the way sound energy travels in waves. Properties of sound include speed, loudness, and pitch. 	how high or low a sound seems to a listener	4.g
Sound has certain characteristic properties because of the way sound energy travels in waves. Properties of sound include speed, loudness, and pitch. 	transfer of energy from a vibrating object in waves that travel through matter	5.c
Why does a tree make sound when it crashes to the ground? How does the sound reach peoples ears if they happen to be in the forest? And in general, how do sounds get started, and how do they travel? Keep reading to find out. 	sounds with frequencies below 20 hertz	6.b
Sound has certain characteristic properties because of the way sound energy travels in waves. Properties of sound include speed, loudness, and pitch. 	measure of the amount of energy in sound waves	7.e
The middle ear contains three tiny bones (ossicles) called the hammer, anvil, and stirrup. If you look at these bones in Figure 20.7, you might notice that they resemble the objects for which they are named. The three bones transmit vibrations from the eardrum to the inner ear. They also amplify the vibrations. The arrangement of the three bones allows them to work together as a lever that increases the amplitude of the waves as they pass to the inner ear. 	bones in the ear canal transmit sound waves to the middle ear	false
The stirrup passes the amplified sound waves to the inner ear through the oval window (see Figure 20.7). When the oval window vibrates, it causes the cochlea to vibrate as well. The cochlea is a shell-like structure that is full of fluid and lined with nerve cells called hair cells. Each hair cell has tiny hair-like projections, as you can see in Figure and this triggers electrical impulses. The electrical impulses travel to the brain through nerves. Only after the nerve impulses reach the brain do we hear the sound. 	the stirrup passes amplified sound waves to the oval window	true
The stirrup passes the amplified sound waves to the inner ear through the oval window (see Figure 20.7). When the oval window vibrates, it causes the cochlea to vibrate as well. The cochlea is a shell-like structure that is full of fluid and lined with nerve cells called hair cells. Each hair cell has tiny hair-like projections, as you can see in Figure and this triggers electrical impulses. The electrical impulses travel to the brain through nerves. Only after the nerve impulses reach the brain do we hear the sound. 	we hear sound as soon as sound waves reach the middle ear	false
Hearing loss caused by loud sounds is permanent. However, this type of hearing loss can be prevented by protecting the ears from loud sounds. 	most adults experience at least some hearing loss as they get older	true
Hearing loss caused by loud sounds is permanent. However, this type of hearing loss can be prevented by protecting the ears from loud sounds. 	the most common cause of hearing loss is exposure to loud sounds	true
Hearing loss caused by loud sounds is permanent. However, this type of hearing loss can be prevented by protecting the ears from loud sounds. 	longterm exposure to loud sounds is needed to damage hearing	false
Hearing loss caused by loud sounds is permanent. However, this type of hearing loss can be prevented by protecting the ears from loud sounds. 	many home and yard chores are loud enough to cause hearing loss	true
You can see two different types of hearing protectors in Figure 20.11. Earplugs are simple hearing protectors that just muffle sounds by partially blocking all sound waves from entering the ears. This type of hearing protector is suitable for lower noise levels, such as the noise of a lawnmower or snowmobile engine. Electronic ear protectors work differently. They identify high-amplitude sound waves and send sound waves through them in the opposite direction. This causes destructive interference with the waves, which reduces their amplitude to zero or nearly zero. This changes even the loudest sounds to just a soft hiss. Sounds that people need to hear, such as the voices of co-workers, are not interfered with in this way and may be amplified instead so they can be heard more clearly. This type of hearing protector is recommended for higher noise levels and situations where its important to be able to hear lower-decibel sounds. 	electronic hearing protectors reduce the amplitude of highamplitude sound waves	true
Hearing loss caused by loud sounds is permanent. However, this type of hearing loss can be prevented by protecting the ears from loud sounds. 	the brain interprets nerve impulses from the ears as sounds	true
People who work in jobs that expose them to loud sounds must wear hearing protectors. Examples include construc- tion workers who work around loud machinery for many hours each day (see Figure 20.10). But anyone exposed to loud sounds for longer than the permissible exposure time should wear hearing protectors. Many home and yard chores and even recreational activities are loud enough to cause hearing loss if people are exposed to them for very long. 	materials used for earplugs include silicon and polyurethane foam	true
Hearing loss caused by loud sounds is permanent. However, this type of hearing loss can be prevented by protecting the ears from loud sounds. 	the brain plays an essential role in hearing	true
The outer ear includes the pinna, ear canal, and eardrum. The pinna is the only part of the ear that extends outward from the head. Its position and shape make it good at catching sound waves and funneling them into the ear canal. The ear canal is a tube that carries sound waves into the ear. The sound waves travel through the air inside the ear canal to the eardrum. The eardrum is like the head of a drum. Its a thin membrane stretched tight across the end of the ear canal. The eardrum vibrates when sound waves strike it, and it sends the vibrations on to the middle ear. 	part of the ear that extends outward from the head	1.d
Hearing loss caused by loud sounds is permanent. However, this type of hearing loss can be prevented by protecting the ears from loud sounds. 	the most common cause of hearing loss is damage to the eardrum	false
The middle ear contains three tiny bones (ossicles) called the hammer, anvil, and stirrup. If you look at these bones in Figure 20.7, you might notice that they resemble the objects for which they are named. The three bones transmit vibrations from the eardrum to the inner ear. They also amplify the vibrations. The arrangement of the three bones allows them to work together as a lever that increases the amplitude of the waves as they pass to the inner ear. 	any of three tiny bones in the middle ear	2.g
The stirrup passes the amplified sound waves to the inner ear through the oval window (see Figure 20.7). When the oval window vibrates, it causes the cochlea to vibrate as well. The cochlea is a shell-like structure that is full of fluid and lined with nerve cells called hair cells. Each hair cell has tiny hair-like projections, as you can see in Figure and this triggers electrical impulses. The electrical impulses travel to the brain through nerves. Only after the nerve impulses reach the brain do we hear the sound. 	fluidfilled structure in the inner ear that is lined with hair cells	3.c
Hearing loss caused by loud sounds is permanent. However, this type of hearing loss can be prevented by protecting the ears from loud sounds. 	the role of hearing protectors is to keep foreign objects out of the ears	false
The outer ear includes the pinna, ear canal, and eardrum. The pinna is the only part of the ear that extends outward from the head. Its position and shape make it good at catching sound waves and funneling them into the ear canal. The ear canal is a tube that carries sound waves into the ear. The sound waves travel through the air inside the ear canal to the eardrum. The eardrum is like the head of a drum. Its a thin membrane stretched tight across the end of the ear canal. The eardrum vibrates when sound waves strike it, and it sends the vibrations on to the middle ear. 	tube that carries sound waves into the ear	4.b
The outer ear includes the pinna, ear canal, and eardrum. The pinna is the only part of the ear that extends outward from the head. Its position and shape make it good at catching sound waves and funneling them into the ear canal. The ear canal is a tube that carries sound waves into the ear. The sound waves travel through the air inside the ear canal to the eardrum. The eardrum is like the head of a drum. Its a thin membrane stretched tight across the end of the ear canal. The eardrum vibrates when sound waves strike it, and it sends the vibrations on to the middle ear. 	the eardrum is the first structure of the ear to vibrate when sound waves strike it	true
The stirrup passes the amplified sound waves to the inner ear through the oval window (see Figure 20.7). When the oval window vibrates, it causes the cochlea to vibrate as well. The cochlea is a shell-like structure that is full of fluid and lined with nerve cells called hair cells. Each hair cell has tiny hair-like projections, as you can see in Figure and this triggers electrical impulses. The electrical impulses travel to the brain through nerves. Only after the nerve impulses reach the brain do we hear the sound. 	waves in cochlear fluid bend the hairlike projections of hair cells	true
The outer ear includes the pinna, ear canal, and eardrum. The pinna is the only part of the ear that extends outward from the head. Its position and shape make it good at catching sound waves and funneling them into the ear canal. The ear canal is a tube that carries sound waves into the ear. The sound waves travel through the air inside the ear canal to the eardrum. The eardrum is like the head of a drum. Its a thin membrane stretched tight across the end of the ear canal. The eardrum vibrates when sound waves strike it, and it sends the vibrations on to the middle ear. 	membrane in the outer ear that vibrates when sound waves strike it	5.e
The stirrup passes the amplified sound waves to the inner ear through the oval window (see Figure 20.7). When the oval window vibrates, it causes the cochlea to vibrate as well. The cochlea is a shell-like structure that is full of fluid and lined with nerve cells called hair cells. Each hair cell has tiny hair-like projections, as you can see in Figure and this triggers electrical impulses. The electrical impulses travel to the brain through nerves. Only after the nerve impulses reach the brain do we hear the sound. 	tiny structure in the inner ear that changes vibrations to nerve impulses	6.f
The middle ear contains three tiny bones (ossicles) called the hammer, anvil, and stirrup. If you look at these bones in Figure 20.7, you might notice that they resemble the objects for which they are named. The three bones transmit vibrations from the eardrum to the inner ear. They also amplify the vibrations. The arrangement of the three bones allows them to work together as a lever that increases the amplitude of the waves as they pass to the inner ear. 	part of the ear that transmits and amplifies vibrations from the eardrum	7.a
Animals such as bats, whales, and dolphins send out ultrasound waves and use their echoes, or reflected waves, to identify the locations of objects they cannot see. This is called echolocation. Animals use echolocation to find prey and avoid running into objects in the dark. Figure 20.13 and the animation at the URL below show how a bat uses echolocation to locate insect prey. 	use of ultrasound to locate underwater objects	1.b
Ultrasound can be used to "see" inside the human body. This use of ultrasound is called ultrasonography. Harmless ultrasound waves are sent inside the body, and the reflected waves are used to create an image on a screen. This technology is used to examine internal organs and unborn babies without risk to the patient. You can see an ultrasound image in Figure 20.15. You can see an animation showing how ultrasonography works at this URL: 	use of ultrasound to examine structures inside the body	2.f
Ultrasound has frequencies higher than the human ear can detect (higher than 20,000 hertz). Although we cant hear ultrasound, it is very useful. Uses include echolocation, sonar, and ultrasonography. 	sound with a frequency higher than 20000 hertz	3.d
Animals such as bats, whales, and dolphins send out ultrasound waves and use their echoes, or reflected waves, to identify the locations of objects they cannot see. This is called echolocation. Animals use echolocation to find prey and avoid running into objects in the dark. Figure 20.13 and the animation at the URL below show how a bat uses echolocation to locate insect prey. 	use of ultrasound by animals to locate objects they cannot see	4.c
People have been using sound to make music for thousands of years. They have invented many different kinds of musical instruments for this purpose. Despite their diversity, however, musical instruments share certain similarities. All musical instruments create sound by causing matter to vibrate. The vibrations start sound waves moving through the air. Most musical instruments use resonance to amplify the sound waves and make the sounds louder. Resonance occurs when an object vibrates in response to sound waves of a certain frequency. In a musical instrument such as a guitar, the whole instrument and the air inside it may vibrate when a single string is plucked. This causes constructive interference with the sound waves, which increases their amplitude. Most musical instruments have a way of changing the frequency of the sound waves they produce. This changes the pitch of the sounds. There are three basic categories of musical instruments: percussion, wind, and stringed instruments. In Figure 	vibration of an object in response to sound waves of a certain frequency	5.a
In this QUEST web extra, Stanford University astrophysicist Todd Hoeksema explains how solar sound waves are a vital ingredient to the science of helioseismology, in which the interior properties of the sun are probed by analyzing and tracking the surface sound waves that bounce into and out of the Sun. For more information on solar sound waves, see http://science.kqed.org/quest/video/web-extra-music-of-the-sun/ . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	how high or low a sound seems to a listener	6.e
People have been using sound to make music for thousands of years. They have invented many different kinds of musical instruments for this purpose. Despite their diversity, however, musical instruments share certain similarities. All musical instruments create sound by causing matter to vibrate. The vibrations start sound waves moving through the air. Most musical instruments use resonance to amplify the sound waves and make the sounds louder. Resonance occurs when an object vibrates in response to sound waves of a certain frequency. In a musical instrument such as a guitar, the whole instrument and the air inside it may vibrate when a single string is plucked. This causes constructive interference with the sound waves, which increases their amplitude. Most musical instruments have a way of changing the frequency of the sound waves they produce. This changes the pitch of the sounds. There are three basic categories of musical instruments: percussion, wind, and stringed instruments. In Figure 	all musical instruments create sound by causing a reed to vibrate	false
In this QUEST web extra, Stanford University astrophysicist Todd Hoeksema explains how solar sound waves are a vital ingredient to the science of helioseismology, in which the interior properties of the sun are probed by analyzing and tracking the surface sound waves that bounce into and out of the Sun. For more information on solar sound waves, see http://science.kqed.org/quest/video/web-extra-music-of-the-sun/ . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	smaller drums produce higherfrequency sound waves than larger drums	true
Ultrasound has frequencies higher than the human ear can detect (higher than 20,000 hertz). Although we cant hear ultrasound, it is very useful. Uses include echolocation, sonar, and ultrasonography. 	ultrasound has frequencies lower than 20 hertz	false
Ultrasound has frequencies higher than the human ear can detect (higher than 20,000 hertz). Although we cant hear ultrasound, it is very useful. Uses include echolocation, sonar, and ultrasonography. 	ultrasonography has been used to determine the depth of the ocean	false
Animals such as bats, whales, and dolphins send out ultrasound waves and use their echoes, or reflected waves, to identify the locations of objects they cannot see. This is called echolocation. Animals use echolocation to find prey and avoid running into objects in the dark. Figure 20.13 and the animation at the URL below show how a bat uses echolocation to locate insect prey. 	animals that use echolocation include bats and whales	true
People have been using sound to make music for thousands of years. They have invented many different kinds of musical instruments for this purpose. Despite their diversity, however, musical instruments share certain similarities. All musical instruments create sound by causing matter to vibrate. The vibrations start sound waves moving through the air. Most musical instruments use resonance to amplify the sound waves and make the sounds louder. Resonance occurs when an object vibrates in response to sound waves of a certain frequency. In a musical instrument such as a guitar, the whole instrument and the air inside it may vibrate when a single string is plucked. This causes constructive interference with the sound waves, which increases their amplitude. Most musical instruments have a way of changing the frequency of the sound waves they produce. This changes the pitch of the sounds. There are three basic categories of musical instruments: percussion, wind, and stringed instruments. In Figure 	the earliest musical instruments date back to about 1900	false
People have been using sound to make music for thousands of years. They have invented many different kinds of musical instruments for this purpose. Despite their diversity, however, musical instruments share certain similarities. All musical instruments create sound by causing matter to vibrate. The vibrations start sound waves moving through the air. Most musical instruments use resonance to amplify the sound waves and make the sounds louder. Resonance occurs when an object vibrates in response to sound waves of a certain frequency. In a musical instrument such as a guitar, the whole instrument and the air inside it may vibrate when a single string is plucked. This causes constructive interference with the sound waves, which increases their amplitude. Most musical instruments have a way of changing the frequency of the sound waves they produce. This changes the pitch of the sounds. There are three basic categories of musical instruments: percussion, wind, and stringed instruments. In Figure 	all musical instruments make sound in the same general way	true
People have been using sound to make music for thousands of years. They have invented many different kinds of musical instruments for this purpose. Despite their diversity, however, musical instruments share certain similarities. All musical instruments create sound by causing matter to vibrate. The vibrations start sound waves moving through the air. Most musical instruments use resonance to amplify the sound waves and make the sounds louder. Resonance occurs when an object vibrates in response to sound waves of a certain frequency. In a musical instrument such as a guitar, the whole instrument and the air inside it may vibrate when a single string is plucked. This causes constructive interference with the sound waves, which increases their amplitude. Most musical instruments have a way of changing the frequency of the sound waves they produce. This changes the pitch of the sounds. There are three basic categories of musical instruments: percussion, wind, and stringed instruments. In Figure 	instruments use resonance to make sounds higher in pitch	false
In this QUEST web extra, Stanford University astrophysicist Todd Hoeksema explains how solar sound waves are a vital ingredient to the science of helioseismology, in which the interior properties of the sun are probed by analyzing and tracking the surface sound waves that bounce into and out of the Sun. For more information on solar sound waves, see http://science.kqed.org/quest/video/web-extra-music-of-the-sun/ . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	a saxophone makes sound when the musician blows across a thin piece of wood	true
Animals such as bats, whales, and dolphins send out ultrasound waves and use their echoes, or reflected waves, to identify the locations of objects they cannot see. This is called echolocation. Animals use echolocation to find prey and avoid running into objects in the dark. Figure 20.13 and the animation at the URL below show how a bat uses echolocation to locate insect prey. 	some animals use reflected sound waves to locate prey	true
Ultrasound has frequencies higher than the human ear can detect (higher than 20,000 hertz). Although we cant hear ultrasound, it is very useful. Uses include echolocation, sonar, and ultrasonography. 	sonar works on the same principle as echolocation	true
Ultrasound can be used to "see" inside the human body. This use of ultrasound is called ultrasonography. Harmless ultrasound waves are sent inside the body, and the reflected waves are used to create an image on a screen. This technology is used to examine internal organs and unborn babies without risk to the patient. You can see an ultrasound image in Figure 20.15. You can see an animation showing how ultrasonography works at this URL: 	the only use of ultrasonography is to create images of unborn babies	false
An electromagnetic wave begins when an electrically charged particle vibrates. This is illustrated in Figure 21.2. When a charged particle vibrates, it causes the electric field surrounding it to vibrate as well. A vibrating electric field, in turn, creates a vibrating magnetic field (you can learn how this happens in the chapter "Electromagnetism"). The two types of vibrating fields combine to create an electromagnetic wave. You can see an animation of an electromagnetic wave at this URL:  (1:31). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	when a charged particle vibrates it causes the electric field around it to vibrate	true
As you can see in Figure 21.2, the electric and magnetic fields that make up an electromagnetic wave occur are at right angles to each other. Both fields are also at right angles to the direction that the wave travels. Therefore, an electromagnetic wave is a transverse wave. 	the two fields of an electromagnetic wave occur at right angles to each other	true
As you can see in Figure 21.2, the electric and magnetic fields that make up an electromagnetic wave occur are at right angles to each other. Both fields are also at right angles to the direction that the wave travels. Therefore, an electromagnetic wave is a transverse wave. 	both fields of an electromagnetic wave vibrate in the same direction that the wave travels	false
Electromagnetic radiation behaves like waves of energy most of the time, but sometimes it behaves like particles. As evidence accumulated for this dual nature of electromagnetic radiation, the famous physicist Albert Einstein developed a new theory about electromagnetic radiation, called the wave-particle theory. This theory explains how electromagnetic radiation can behave as both a wave and a particle. In brief, when an electron returns to a lower energy level, it is thought to give off a tiny "packet" of energy called a photon (see Figure 21.3). The amount of energy in a photon may vary. It depends on the frequency of electromagnetic radiation. The higher the frequency is, the more energy a photon has. 	the waveparticle theory explains the difference between electromagnetic and mechanical waves	false
Unlike a mechanical transverse wave, which requires a medium, an electromagnetic transverse wave can travel through space without a medium. Waves traveling through a medium lose some energy to the medium. However, when an electromagnetic wave travels through space, no energy is lost, so the wave doesnt get weaker as it travels. However, the energy is "diluted" as it spreads out over an ever-larger area as it travels away from the source. This is similar to the way a sound wave spreads out and becomes less intense farther from the sound source. 	electromagnetic waves cannot travel through matter	false
An electromagnetic wave is a wave that consists of vibrating electric and magnetic fields. A familiar example will help you understand the fields that make up an electromagnetic wave. Think about a common bar magnet. It exerts magnetic force in an area surrounding it, called the magnetic field. You can see the magnetic field of a bar magnet in Figure 21.1. Because of this force field, a magnet can exert force on objects without touching them. They just have to be in its magnetic field. An electric field is similar to a magnetic field (see Figure 21.1). An electric field is an area of electrical force surrounding a charged particle. Like a magnetic field, an electric field can exert force on objects over a distance without actually touching them. 	a vibrating electric field generates a charged particle	false
Unlike a mechanical transverse wave, which requires a medium, an electromagnetic transverse wave can travel through space without a medium. Waves traveling through a medium lose some energy to the medium. However, when an electromagnetic wave travels through space, no energy is lost, so the wave doesnt get weaker as it travels. However, the energy is "diluted" as it spreads out over an ever-larger area as it travels away from the source. This is similar to the way a sound wave spreads out and becomes less intense farther from the sound source. 	electromagnetic waves may spread out and travel around obstacles	true
Electromagnetic radiation behaves like waves of energy most of the time, but sometimes it behaves like particles. As evidence accumulated for this dual nature of electromagnetic radiation, the famous physicist Albert Einstein developed a new theory about electromagnetic radiation, called the wave-particle theory. This theory explains how electromagnetic radiation can behave as both a wave and a particle. In brief, when an electron returns to a lower energy level, it is thought to give off a tiny "packet" of energy called a photon (see Figure 21.3). The amount of energy in a photon may vary. It depends on the frequency of electromagnetic radiation. The higher the frequency is, the more energy a photon has. 	when electrons return to lower energy levels they give off particles of matter	false
As you can see in Figure 21.2, the electric and magnetic fields that make up an electromagnetic wave occur are at right angles to each other. Both fields are also at right angles to the direction that the wave travels. Therefore, an electromagnetic wave is a transverse wave. 	all electromagnetic radiation is dangerous except for light	false
The most important source of electromagnetic radiation on Earth is the sun. Electromagnetic waves travel from the sun to Earth across space and provide virtually all the energy that supports life on our planet. Many other sources of electromagnetic waves that people use depend on technology. Radio waves, microwaves, and X rays are examples. We use these electromagnetic waves for communications, cooking, medicine, and many other purposes. Youll learn about all these types of electromagnetic waves in this chapters lesson on "The Electromagnetic Spectrum." 	electromagnetic waves are used for communications cooking and medicine	true
The most important source of electromagnetic radiation on Earth is the sun. Electromagnetic waves travel from the sun to Earth across space and provide virtually all the energy that supports life on our planet. Many other sources of electromagnetic waves that people use depend on technology. Radio waves, microwaves, and X rays are examples. We use these electromagnetic waves for communications, cooking, medicine, and many other purposes. Youll learn about all these types of electromagnetic waves in this chapters lesson on "The Electromagnetic Spectrum." 	electromagnetic radiation provides the energy that plants need for photosynthesis	true
As you can see in Figure 21.2, the electric and magnetic fields that make up an electromagnetic wave occur are at right angles to each other. Both fields are also at right angles to the direction that the wave travels. Therefore, an electromagnetic wave is a transverse wave. 	an electromagnetic wave gains energy as it travels across space	false
Unlike a mechanical transverse wave, which requires a medium, an electromagnetic transverse wave can travel through space without a medium. Waves traveling through a medium lose some energy to the medium. However, when an electromagnetic wave travels through space, no energy is lost, so the wave doesnt get weaker as it travels. However, the energy is "diluted" as it spreads out over an ever-larger area as it travels away from the source. This is similar to the way a sound wave spreads out and becomes less intense farther from the sound source. 	the human eye can detect all frequencies of electromagnetic waves	false
As you can see in Figure 21.2, the electric and magnetic fields that make up an electromagnetic wave occur are at right angles to each other. Both fields are also at right angles to the direction that the wave travels. Therefore, an electromagnetic wave is a transverse wave. 	all of the suns electromagnetic radiation travels to earth	false
Electromagnetic radiation behaves like waves of energy most of the time, but sometimes it behaves like particles. As evidence accumulated for this dual nature of electromagnetic radiation, the famous physicist Albert Einstein developed a new theory about electromagnetic radiation, called the wave-particle theory. This theory explains how electromagnetic radiation can behave as both a wave and a particle. In brief, when an electron returns to a lower energy level, it is thought to give off a tiny "packet" of energy called a photon (see Figure 21.3). The amount of energy in a photon may vary. It depends on the frequency of electromagnetic radiation. The higher the frequency is, the more energy a photon has. 	einstein explained how light can behave both as a wave and as a particle	true
The most important source of electromagnetic radiation on Earth is the sun. Electromagnetic waves travel from the sun to Earth across space and provide virtually all the energy that supports life on our planet. Many other sources of electromagnetic waves that people use depend on technology. Radio waves, microwaves, and X rays are examples. We use these electromagnetic waves for communications, cooking, medicine, and many other purposes. Youll learn about all these types of electromagnetic waves in this chapters lesson on "The Electromagnetic Spectrum." 	transfer of energy by waves such as radio waves and light	1. e
Electromagnetic radiation behaves like waves of energy most of the time, but sometimes it behaves like particles. As evidence accumulated for this dual nature of electromagnetic radiation, the famous physicist Albert Einstein developed a new theory about electromagnetic radiation, called the wave-particle theory. This theory explains how electromagnetic radiation can behave as both a wave and a particle. In brief, when an electron returns to a lower energy level, it is thought to give off a tiny "packet" of energy called a photon (see Figure 21.3). The amount of energy in a photon may vary. It depends on the frequency of electromagnetic radiation. The higher the frequency is, the more energy a photon has. 	explanation for how light can behave as both a wave and a particle	2. f
An electromagnetic wave is a wave that consists of vibrating electric and magnetic fields. A familiar example will help you understand the fields that make up an electromagnetic wave. Think about a common bar magnet. It exerts magnetic force in an area surrounding it, called the magnetic field. You can see the magnetic field of a bar magnet in Figure 21.1. Because of this force field, a magnet can exert force on objects without touching them. They just have to be in its magnetic field. An electric field is similar to a magnetic field (see Figure 21.1). An electric field is an area of electrical force surrounding a charged particle. Like a magnetic field, an electric field can exert force on objects over a distance without actually touching them. 	invisible area of force surrounding a charged particle	3. g
As you can see in Figure 21.2, the electric and magnetic fields that make up an electromagnetic wave occur are at right angles to each other. Both fields are also at right angles to the direction that the wave travels. Therefore, an electromagnetic wave is a transverse wave. 	wave in which vibrations occur at right angles to the direction the wave travels	4.d
Electromagnetic radiation behaves like waves of energy most of the time, but sometimes it behaves like particles. As evidence accumulated for this dual nature of electromagnetic radiation, the famous physicist Albert Einstein developed a new theory about electromagnetic radiation, called the wave-particle theory. This theory explains how electromagnetic radiation can behave as both a wave and a particle. In brief, when an electron returns to a lower energy level, it is thought to give off a tiny "packet" of energy called a photon (see Figure 21.3). The amount of energy in a photon may vary. It depends on the frequency of electromagnetic radiation. The higher the frequency is, the more energy a photon has. 	packet of electromagnetic energy	5.a
As you can see in Figure 21.2, the electric and magnetic fields that make up an electromagnetic wave occur are at right angles to each other. Both fields are also at right angles to the direction that the wave travels. Therefore, an electromagnetic wave is a transverse wave. 	wave that consists of vibrating electric and magnetic fields	6.b
An electromagnetic wave is a wave that consists of vibrating electric and magnetic fields. A familiar example will help you understand the fields that make up an electromagnetic wave. Think about a common bar magnet. It exerts magnetic force in an area surrounding it, called the magnetic field. You can see the magnetic field of a bar magnet in Figure 21.1. Because of this force field, a magnet can exert force on objects without touching them. They just have to be in its magnetic field. An electric field is similar to a magnetic field (see Figure 21.1). An electric field is an area of electrical force surrounding a charged particle. Like a magnetic field, an electric field can exert force on objects over a distance without actually touching them. 	invisible area of force surrounding a magnet	7.c
Although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency. 	some electromagnetic waves are extremely harmful	true
Although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency. 	all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed across space	true
All electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed through empty space. That speed, called the speed of light, is 300 million meters per second (3.0  108 m/s). Nothing else in the universe is known to travel this fast. If you could move that fast, you would be able to travel around Earth 7.5 times in just 1 second! The sun is about 150 million kilometers (93 million miles) from Earth, but it takes electromagnetic radiation only 8 minutes to reach Earth from the sun. Electromagnetic waves travel more slowly through a medium, and their speed may vary from one medium to another. For example, light travels more slowly through water than it does through air (see Figure 21.4). You can learn more about the speed of light at this URL: http://videos.howstuffworks.com/discovery/29407-assignme 	it takes electromagnetic radiation 93 minutes to reach earth from the sun	false
Although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency. 	all electromagnetic waves have the same wavelength	false
Although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency. 	electromagnetic waves travel more quickly through a medium than they do across space	false
Although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency. 	the frequencies of electromagnetic waves range from 1 to 100 hertz	false
Although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency. 	the highestfrequency electromagnetic waves may have frequencies of trillions of hertz	true
Although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency. 	the frequency of an electromagnetic wave is inversely related to its wavelength	true
All electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed through empty space. That speed, called the speed of light, is 300 million meters per second (3.0  108 m/s). Nothing else in the universe is known to travel this fast. If you could move that fast, you would be able to travel around Earth 7.5 times in just 1 second! The sun is about 150 million kilometers (93 million miles) from Earth, but it takes electromagnetic radiation only 8 minutes to reach Earth from the sun. Electromagnetic waves travel more slowly through a medium, and their speed may vary from one medium to another. For example, light travels more slowly through water than it does through air (see Figure 21.4). You can learn more about the speed of light at this URL: http://videos.howstuffworks.com/discovery/29407-assignme 	light is diffracted when it passes from air to water at an angle	false
Although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency. 	light has a faster speed across space than do any other wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation	false
Although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency. 	electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed in all media	false
Although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency. 	if you know only the wavelength of an electromagnetic wave you can calculate its frequency	true
Wavelength and frequency are defined in the same way for electromagnetic waves as they are for mechanical waves. Both properties are illustrated in Figure 21.5. Wavelength is the distance between corresponding points of adjacent waves. Wavelengths of electromagnetic waves range from many kilometers to a tiny fraction of a millimeter. Frequency is the number of waves that pass a fixed point in a given amount of time. Frequencies of electro- magnetic waves range from thousands to trillions of waves per second. Higher frequency waves have greater energy. 	distance between corresponding points of adjacent waves	1.b
Although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency. 	fastest known speed in the universe	2.a
Although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency. 	matter through which an electromagnetic wave may travel	3.f
Although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency. 	number of waves that pass a fixed point in a given amount of time	4.c
Although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency. 	example of electromagnetic radiation	5.e
Although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed, they may differ in their wavelength and frequency. 	value that equals wavelength multiplied by wave frequency	6.d
The shortest-wavelength, highest-frequency electromagnetic waves are X rays and gamma rays. These rays have so much energy that they can pass through many materials. This makes them potentially very harmful, but it also makes them useful for certain purposes. 	radio waves have the least amount of energy of all electromagnetic waves	true
Mid-wavelength electromagnetic waves are commonly called light. This range of electromagnetic waves has shorter wavelengths and higher frequencies than radio waves, but not as short and high as X rays and gamma rays. Light includes visible light, infrared light, and ultraviolet light. If you look back at Figure 21.7, you can see where these different types of light waves fall in the electromagnetic spectrum. 	visible light has higherfrequency waves than ultraviolet light	false
The shortest wavelength, highest frequency radio waves are called microwaves (see Figure 21.7). Microwaves have more energy than other radio waves. Thats why they are useful for heating food in microwave ovens. Microwaves have other important uses as well, including cell phone transmissions and radar, which is a device for determining the presence and location of an object by measuring the time for the echo of a radio wave to return from it and the direction from which it returns. These uses are described in Figure 21.10. You can learn more about microwaves and their uses in the video at this URL:  (3:23). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	cell phone transmissions are carried by microwaves	true
Radio waves are the broad range of electromagnetic waves with the longest wavelengths and lowest frequencies. In Figure 21.7, you can see that the wavelength of radio waves may be longer than a soccer field. With their low frequencies, radio waves have the least energy of electromagnetic waves, but they still are extremely useful. They are used for radio and television broadcasts, microwave ovens, cell phone transmissions, and radar. You can learn more about radio waves, including how they were discovered, at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	radar stands for radio detection and recovery	false
Mid-wavelength electromagnetic waves are commonly called light. This range of electromagnetic waves has shorter wavelengths and higher frequencies than radio waves, but not as short and high as X rays and gamma rays. Light includes visible light, infrared light, and ultraviolet light. If you look back at Figure 21.7, you can see where these different types of light waves fall in the electromagnetic spectrum. 	visible light consists of a very wide range of wavelengths	false
Light with wavelengths shorter than visible light is called ultraviolet light. The term ultraviolet means "above violet." Ultraviolet light is the range of light waves that have shorter wavelengths than violet light in the visible spectrum. Humans cant see ultraviolet light, but it is very useful nonetheless. It has higher-frequency waves than visible light, so it has more energy. It can be used to kill bacteria in food and to sterilize laboratory equipment (see Figure 21.12). The human skin also makes vitamin D when it is exposed to ultraviolet light. Vitamin D is needed for strong bones and teeth. You can learn more about ultraviolet light and its discovery at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Too much exposure to ultraviolet light can cause sunburn and skin cancer. You can protect your skin from ultraviolet light by wearing clothing that covers your skin and by applying sunscreen to any exposed areas. The SPF, or sun- protection factor, of sunscreen gives a rough idea of how long it protects the skin from sunburn (see Figure 21.13). A sunscreen with a higher SPF protects the skin longer. You should use sunscreen with an SPF of at least 15 even on cloudy days, because ultraviolet light can travel through clouds. Sunscreen should be applied liberally and often. You can learn more about the effects of ultraviolet light on the skin at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	you should protect your skin from ultraviolet light even on cloudy days	true
The shortest-wavelength, highest-frequency electromagnetic waves are X rays and gamma rays. These rays have so much energy that they can pass through many materials. This makes them potentially very harmful, but it also makes them useful for certain purposes. 	the only use of x rays is to make images of bones and teeth inside the body	false
The shortest-wavelength, highest-frequency electromagnetic waves are X rays and gamma rays. These rays have so much energy that they can pass through many materials. This makes them potentially very harmful, but it also makes them useful for certain purposes. 	gamma rays cannot pass through bones and teeth	false
Gamma rays are the most energetic of all electromagnetic waves. They can pass through most materials, including bones and teeth. Nonetheless, even these waves are useful. For example, they can be used to treat cancer. A medical device sends gamma rays the site of the cancer, and the rays destroy the cancerous cells. If you want to learn more about gamma rays, watch the video at the URL below. MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	gamma rays can be used to destroy cancer cells	true
Radio waves are the broad range of electromagnetic waves with the longest wavelengths and lowest frequencies. In Figure 21.7, you can see that the wavelength of radio waves may be longer than a soccer field. With their low frequencies, radio waves have the least energy of electromagnetic waves, but they still are extremely useful. They are used for radio and television broadcasts, microwave ovens, cell phone transmissions, and radar. You can learn more about radio waves, including how they were discovered, at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	radar is used for tracking storms	true
Mid-wavelength electromagnetic waves are commonly called light. This range of electromagnetic waves has shorter wavelengths and higher frequencies than radio waves, but not as short and high as X rays and gamma rays. Light includes visible light, infrared light, and ultraviolet light. If you look back at Figure 21.7, you can see where these different types of light waves fall in the electromagnetic spectrum. 	ultraviolet light has shorter wavelengths than visible light	true
Television broadcasts also use radio waves. Sounds are encoded with frequency modulation, and pictures are encoded with amplitude modulation. The encoded radio waves are broadcast from a TV tower like the one in Figure 21.9. When the waves are received by television sets, they are decoded and changed back to sounds and pictures. 	television broadcasts cannot pass through the ionosphere	false
Television broadcasts also use radio waves. Sounds are encoded with frequency modulation, and pictures are encoded with amplitude modulation. The encoded radio waves are broadcast from a TV tower like the one in Figure 21.9. When the waves are received by television sets, they are decoded and changed back to sounds and pictures. 	television broadcasts encode pictures with amplitude modulation	true
Mid-wavelength electromagnetic waves are commonly called light. This range of electromagnetic waves has shorter wavelengths and higher frequencies than radio waves, but not as short and high as X rays and gamma rays. Light includes visible light, infrared light, and ultraviolet light. If you look back at Figure 21.7, you can see where these different types of light waves fall in the electromagnetic spectrum. 	infrared light is used to sterilize surgical instruments	false
The shortest-wavelength, highest-frequency electromagnetic waves are X rays and gamma rays. These rays have so much energy that they can pass through many materials. This makes them potentially very harmful, but it also makes them useful for certain purposes. 	x rays cannot pass through lead	true
The shortest-wavelength, highest-frequency electromagnetic waves are X rays and gamma rays. These rays have so much energy that they can pass through many materials. This makes them potentially very harmful, but it also makes them useful for certain purposes. 	electromagnetic waves with the greatest energy	1.g
Mid-wavelength electromagnetic waves are commonly called light. This range of electromagnetic waves has shorter wavelengths and higher frequencies than radio waves, but not as short and high as X rays and gamma rays. Light includes visible light, infrared light, and ultraviolet light. If you look back at Figure 21.7, you can see where these different types of light waves fall in the electromagnetic spectrum. 	full range of wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation	2.e
Mid-wavelength electromagnetic waves are commonly called light. This range of electromagnetic waves has shorter wavelengths and higher frequencies than radio waves, but not as short and high as X rays and gamma rays. Light includes visible light, infrared light, and ultraviolet light. If you look back at Figure 21.7, you can see where these different types of light waves fall in the electromagnetic spectrum. 	electromagnetic waves with wavelengths between infrared and ultraviolet light	3.f
The only light that people can see is called visible light. It refers to a very narrow range of wavelengths in the electromagnetic spectrum that falls between infrared light and ultraviolet light. Within the visible range, we see light of different wavelengths as different colors of light, from red light, which has the longest wavelength, to violet light, which has the shortest wavelength. You can see the spectrum of colors of visible light in Figure 21.11. When all of the wavelengths are combined, as they are in sunlight, visible light appears white. You can learn more about visible light in the chapter "Visible Light" and at the URL below. 	light with the shortest wavelengths	4.c
The shortest-wavelength, highest-frequency electromagnetic waves are X rays and gamma rays. These rays have so much energy that they can pass through many materials. This makes them potentially very harmful, but it also makes them useful for certain purposes. 	electromagnetic waves with the longest wavelengths	5.a
The only light that people can see is called visible light. It refers to a very narrow range of wavelengths in the electromagnetic spectrum that falls between infrared light and ultraviolet light. Within the visible range, we see light of different wavelengths as different colors of light, from red light, which has the longest wavelength, to violet light, which has the shortest wavelength. You can see the spectrum of colors of visible light in Figure 21.11. When all of the wavelengths are combined, as they are in sunlight, visible light appears white. You can learn more about visible light in the chapter "Visible Light" and at the URL below. 	light with the longest wavelengths	6.b
Mid-wavelength electromagnetic waves are commonly called light. This range of electromagnetic waves has shorter wavelengths and higher frequencies than radio waves, but not as short and high as X rays and gamma rays. Light includes visible light, infrared light, and ultraviolet light. If you look back at Figure 21.7, you can see where these different types of light waves fall in the electromagnetic spectrum. 	radio waves with the highest frequencies	7.d
When visible light strikes matter, it interacts with it. How light interacts with matter depends on the type of matter. 	referring to matter that allows all visible light to pass through	1.f
When visible light strikes matter, it interacts with it. How light interacts with matter depends on the type of matter. 	production of visible light in a way that does not require high temperatures	2.d
When visible light strikes matter, it interacts with it. How light interacts with matter depends on the type of matter. 	referring to matter that does not allow visible light to pass through it	3.g
When visible light strikes matter, it interacts with it. How light interacts with matter depends on the type of matter. 	production of visible light by an object that is so hot it glows	4.a
Look at the classroom in Figure 22.1. It has several sources of visible light. One source of visible light is the sun. Sunlight enters the classroom through the windows. The sun provides virtually all of the visible light that living things need. Visible light travels across space from the sun to Earth in electromagnetic waves. But how does the sun produce light? Read on to find out. 	passage of light through matter	5.e
When visible light strikes matter, it interacts with it. How light interacts with matter depends on the type of matter. 	referring to matter that transmits but scatters visible light	6. b
Many objects have color because they contain pigments. A pigment is a substance that colors materials by reflecting light of certain wavelengths and absorbing light of other wavelengths. A very common pigment is chlorophyll, which is found in plants. This dark green pigment absorbs all but green wavelengths of visible light. It is responsible for capturing the light energy needed for photosynthesis. Pigments are also found in paints, inks, and dyes. Just three pigments, called primary pigments, can be combined to produce all other colors. The primary pigment colors are the same as the secondary colors of light: cyan, magenta, and yellow. The printer ink cartridges in Figure 22.8 come in just these three colors. They are the only colors needed for full-color printing. 	substance that colors materials by reflecting light of certain wavelengths and absorbing light of other	7. c
The sun and other stars produce light because they are so hot. They glow with light due to their extremely high temperatures. This way of producing light is called incandescence. Some objects produce light without becoming very hot. They generate light through chemical reactions or other processes. Producing light without heat is called luminescence. Objects that produce light by luminescence are said to be luminous. Luminescence, in turn, can occur in different ways: One type of luminescence is called fluorescence. In this process, a substance absorbs shorter-wavelength light, such as ultraviolet light, and then gives off light in the visible range of wavelengths. Certain minerals produce light in this way. Another type of luminescence is called electroluminescence. In this process, a substance gives off light when an electric current runs through it. Some gases produce light in this way. A third type of luminescence is called bioluminescence. This is the production of light by living things as a result of chemical reactions. Examples of bioluminescent organisms are pictured in Figure 22.2. You can learn more about bioluminescence in the video at this URL:  Many other objects appear to produce their own light, but they actually just reflect light from another source. The moon is a good example. It appears to glow in the sky from its own light, but in reality it is just reflecting light from the sun. Objects like the moon that are lit up by another source of light are said to be illuminated. Everything you can see that doesnt produce its own light is illuminated. 	a luminous object is an object that appears to glow because it is reflecting light from another source	false
When visible light strikes matter, it interacts with it. How light interacts with matter depends on the type of matter. 	some minerals produce visible light when they absorb ultraviolet light	true
Visible light consists of a range of wavelengths. The wavelength of visible light determines the color that the light appears. As you can see in Figure 22.4, light with the longest wavelength appears red, and light with the shortest wavelength appears violet. In between is a continuum of all the other colors of light. Only a few colors of light are represented in the figure. 	a neon light produces violet or blue light	false
When visible light strikes matter, it interacts with it. How light interacts with matter depends on the type of matter. 	an object that reflects all the light that strikes it is opaque	true
When visible light strikes matter, it interacts with it. How light interacts with matter depends on the type of matter. 	fireflies glow with visible light because of chemical reactions	true
When visible light strikes matter, it interacts with it. How light interacts with matter depends on the type of matter. 	all plants use visible light to make food by photosynthesis	true
We see an opaque object, such as the apple in Figure 22.6, because it reflects some wavelengths of visible light. The wavelengths that are reflected determine the color that the object appears. For example, the apple in the figure appears red because it reflects red light and absorbs light of other wavelengths. We see a transparent or translucent object, such as the bottle in Figure 22.6, because it transmits light. The wavelength of the transmitted light determines the color that the object appears. For example, the bottle in the figure appears blue because it transmits blue light. The color of light that strikes an object may also affect the color that the object appears. For example, if only blue light strikes a red apple, the blue light is absorbed and no light is reflected. When no light reflects from an object, it looks black. Black isnt a color. It is the absence of light. 	the moon is an example of a luminescent object	false
The classroom in Figure 22.1 has artificial light sources in addition to natural sunlight. There are fluorescent lights on the ceiling of the room. There are also projectors on the ceiling that are shining light on screens. In these and most other artificial light sources, electricity provides the energy and some type of light bulb converts the electrical energy to visible light. How a light bulb produces visible light varies by type of bulb, as you can see in Table 22.1. Incandescent light bulbs, which produce light by incandescence, give off a lot of heat as well as light, so they waste energy. Other light bulbs produce light by luminescence, so they produce little if any heat. These light bulbs use energy more efficiently. Which types of light bulbs do you use? Type of Light Bulb Incandescent Light Description An incandescent light bulb produces visible light by incandescence. The bulb contains a thin wire filament made of tungsten. When electric current passes through the filament, it gets extremely hot and glows. You can learn more about incandescent light bulbs at the URL below. Fluorescent Light A fluorescent light bulb produces visible light by flu- orescence. The bulb contains mercury gas that gives off ultraviolet light when electricity passes through it. The inside of the bulb is coated with a substance called phosphor. The phosphor absorbs the ultraviolet light and then gives off most of the energy as visible light. You can learn more about fluorescent light bulbs at this URL: http://science.discovery.com/videos/deco Type of Light Bulb Neon Light Vapor Light LED Light Description A neon light produces visible light by electrolumines- cence. The bulb is a glass tube that contains the noble gas neon. When electricity passes through the gas, it excites electrons of neon atoms, causing them to give off visible light. Neon produces red light. Other noble gases are also used in lights, and they produce light of different colors. For example, krypton produces violet light, and argon produces blue light. A vapor light produces visible light by electrolumi- nescence. The bulb contains a small amount of solid sodium or mercury as well as a mixture of neon and argon gases. When an electric current passes through the gases, it causes the solid sodium or mercury to change to a gas and emit visible light. Sodium vapor lights, like these streetlights, produce yellowish light. Mercury vapor lights produce bluish light. Vapor lights are very bright and energy efficient. The bulbs are also long lasting. LED stands for light-emitting diode. This type of light contains a material, called a semi-conductor, which gives off visible light when a current runs through it. LED lights are used for traffic lights and indicator lights on computers, cars, and many other devices. This type of light is very reliable and durable. 	the filament of an incandescent light bulb glows because it gets extremely hot	true
When visible light strikes matter, it interacts with it. How light interacts with matter depends on the type of matter. 	an led light produces visible light by fluorescence	false
We see an opaque object, such as the apple in Figure 22.6, because it reflects some wavelengths of visible light. The wavelengths that are reflected determine the color that the object appears. For example, the apple in the figure appears red because it reflects red light and absorbs light of other wavelengths. We see a transparent or translucent object, such as the bottle in Figure 22.6, because it transmits light. The wavelength of the transmitted light determines the color that the object appears. For example, the bottle in the figure appears blue because it transmits blue light. The color of light that strikes an object may also affect the color that the object appears. For example, if only blue light strikes a red apple, the blue light is absorbed and no light is reflected. When no light reflects from an object, it looks black. Black isnt a color. It is the absence of light. 	you can see clearly through an object that is translucent	false
A prism, like the one in Figure 22.5, can be used to separate visible light into its different colors. A prism is a pyramid-shaped object made of transparent matter, usually clear glass. It transmits light but slows it down. When light passes from the air to the glass of the prism, the change in speed causes the light to bend. Different wavelengths of light bend at different angles. This causes the beam of light to separate into light of different wavelengths. What we see is a rainbow of colors. Look back at the rainbow that opened this chapter. Do you see all the different colors of light, from red at the top to violet at the bottom? Individual raindrops act as tiny prisms. They separate sunlight into its different wavelengths and create a rainbow. For an animated version of Figure 22.5, go to the URL: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Light_dispersion_conce 	a rainbow occurs because raindrops separate light into its different wavelengths	true
We see an opaque object, such as the apple in Figure 22.6, because it reflects some wavelengths of visible light. The wavelengths that are reflected determine the color that the object appears. For example, the apple in the figure appears red because it reflects red light and absorbs light of other wavelengths. We see a transparent or translucent object, such as the bottle in Figure 22.6, because it transmits light. The wavelength of the transmitted light determines the color that the object appears. For example, the bottle in the figure appears blue because it transmits blue light. The color of light that strikes an object may also affect the color that the object appears. For example, if only blue light strikes a red apple, the blue light is absorbed and no light is reflected. When no light reflects from an object, it looks black. Black isnt a color. It is the absence of light. 	an apple appears red because it absorbs only red light	false
The human eye can distinguish only red, green, and blue light. These three colors of light are called primary colors. All other colors of light can be created by combining the primary colors. As you can see in Figure 22.7, when red and green light combine, they form yellow. When red and blue light combine, they form magenta, a dark pinkish color, and when blue and green light combine, they form cyan, a bluish green color. Yellow, magenta, and cyan are called the secondary colors of light. Look at the center of the diagram in Figure 22.7. When all three primary colors combine, they form white light. White is the color of the full spectrum of visible light when all of its wavelengths are combined. You can explore the colors of visible light and how they combine with the interactive animations at this URL:  . 	the bluish green color called cyan is a secondary color of light	true
The human eye can distinguish only red, green, and blue light. These three colors of light are called primary colors. All other colors of light can be created by combining the primary colors. As you can see in Figure 22.7, when red and green light combine, they form yellow. When red and blue light combine, they form magenta, a dark pinkish color, and when blue and green light combine, they form cyan, a bluish green color. Yellow, magenta, and cyan are called the secondary colors of light. Look at the center of the diagram in Figure 22.7. When all three primary colors combine, they form white light. White is the color of the full spectrum of visible light when all of its wavelengths are combined. You can explore the colors of visible light and how they combine with the interactive animations at this URL:  . 	combining red green and blue light produces light that appears to be black	false
Many objects have color because they contain pigments. A pigment is a substance that colors materials by reflecting light of certain wavelengths and absorbing light of other wavelengths. A very common pigment is chlorophyll, which is found in plants. This dark green pigment absorbs all but green wavelengths of visible light. It is responsible for capturing the light energy needed for photosynthesis. Pigments are also found in paints, inks, and dyes. Just three pigments, called primary pigments, can be combined to produce all other colors. The primary pigment colors are the same as the secondary colors of light: cyan, magenta, and yellow. The printer ink cartridges in Figure 22.8 come in just these three colors. They are the only colors needed for full-color printing. 	the primary colors of pigments are the same as the primary colors of light	false
If a surface is extremely smooth, like very still water, then an image formed by reflection is sharp and clear. This is called regular reflection. If the surface is even slightly rough, an image may not form, or if there is an image, it is blurry or fuzzy. This is called diffuse reflection. Both types of reflection are represented in Figure 22.10. You can also see animations of both types of reflection at this URL: http://toolboxes.flexiblelearning.net.au/demosites/serie In Figure 22.10, the waves of light are represented by arrows called rays. Rays that strike the surface are referred to as incident rays, and rays that reflect off the surface are known as reflected rays. In regular reflection, all the rays are reflected in the same direction. This explains why regular reflection forms a clear image. In diffuse reflection, in contrast, the rays are reflected in many different directions. This is why diffuse reflection forms, at best, a blurry image. 	formation of a clear image by light reflected from a very smooth surface	1.d
Did you ever see a cat chase after a laser light, like the one in Figure 22.21? A laser is a device that produces a very focused beam of light of just one wavelength and color. Waves of laser light are synchronized so the crests and troughs of the waves line up (see Figure 22.21). Laser light is created in a tube like the one shown in Figure 22.22. Electrons in a material such as a ruby crystal are stimulated to radiate photons of light of one wavelength. At each end of the tube is a concave mirror. The photons of light bounce back and forth in the tube off the mirrors. This focuses the light. The mirror at one end of the tube is partly transparent. A constant stream of photons passes through the transparent part, forming the laser beam. You can see an animation showing how a laser works at this URL:  (1:12). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Besides entertaining a cat, laser light has many other uses. It is used to scan bar codes, for example, and to carry communication signals in optical fibers. Optical fibers are extremely thin glass tubes that are used to guide laser light (see Figure 22.23). Sounds or pictures are encoded in pulses of laser light, which are then sent through an optical fiber. All of the light reflects off the inside of the fiber, so none of it escapes. As a result, the signal remains strong even over long distances. More than one signal can travel through an optic fiber at the same time, as you can see in Figure 22.23. Optical fibers are used to carry telephone, cable TV, and Internet signals. 	device that produces a very focused beam of light of just one wavelength	2.b
The other type of curved mirror, a convex mirror, is shaped like the outside of a bowl. This type of mirror forms only virtual images. The image is always right-side up and smaller than the actual object, which makes the object appear farther away than it really is. You can see how a convex mirror forms an image in Figure 22.14 and in the animation at the URL below. Because of their shape, convex mirrors can gather and reflect light from a wide area. This is why they are used as side mirrors on cars. They give the driver a wider view of the area around the vehicle than a plane mirror would. 	curving outward like the outside of a bowl	3.a
Almost all surfaces reflect some of the light that strikes them. The still water of the lake in Figure 22.9 reflects almost all of the light that strikes it. The reflected light forms an image of nearby objects. An image is a copy of an object that is formed by reflected or refracted light. 	copy of an object that is formed by reflected or refracted light	4.f
If a surface is extremely smooth, like very still water, then an image formed by reflection is sharp and clear. This is called regular reflection. If the surface is even slightly rough, an image may not form, or if there is an image, it is blurry or fuzzy. This is called diffuse reflection. Both types of reflection are represented in Figure 22.10. You can also see animations of both types of reflection at this URL: http://toolboxes.flexiblelearning.net.au/demosites/serie In Figure 22.10, the waves of light are represented by arrows called rays. Rays that strike the surface are referred to as incident rays, and rays that reflect off the surface are known as reflected rays. In regular reflection, all the rays are reflected in the same direction. This explains why regular reflection forms a clear image. In diffuse reflection, in contrast, the rays are reflected in many different directions. This is why diffuse reflection forms, at best, a blurry image. 	formation of a blurry image by light reflected from a rough surface	5.g
Some mirrors have a curved rather than flat surface. Curved mirrors can be concave or convex. A concave mirror is shaped like the inside of a bowl. This type of mirror forms either real or virtual images, depending on where the object is placed relative to the focal point. The focal point is the point in front of the mirror where the reflected rays intersect. You can see how concave mirrors form images in Figure 22.13 and in the interactive animation at the URL below. The animation allows you to move an object to see how its position affects the image. Concave mirrors are used behind car headlights. They focus the light and make it brighter. They are also used in some telescopes. 	curving inward like the inside of a bowl	6.c
Almost all surfaces reflect some of the light that strikes them. The still water of the lake in Figure 22.9 reflects almost all of the light that strikes it. The reflected light forms an image of nearby objects. An image is a copy of an object that is formed by reflected or refracted light. 	study of visible light and the ways it can be used	7.e
A camera is an optical instrument that records an image of an object. The image may be recorded on film or it may be detected by an electronic sensor that stores the image digitally. Regardless of how the image is recorded, all cameras form images in the same basic way, as demonstrated in Figure 22.20 and at the URL below. Light passes through the lens at the front of the camera and enters the camera through an opening called the aperture. As light passes through the lens, it forms a reduced real image. The image focuses on film (or a sensor) at the back of the camera. The lens may be moved back and forth to bring the image into focus. The shutter controls the amount of light that strikes the film (or sensor). It stays open longer in dim light to let more light in. For a series of animations showing how a camera works, go to this URL:  . 	moving the lens of a camera controls the amount of light that enters the camera	false
Did you ever see a cat chase after a laser light, like the one in Figure 22.21? A laser is a device that produces a very focused beam of light of just one wavelength and color. Waves of laser light are synchronized so the crests and troughs of the waves line up (see Figure 22.21). Laser light is created in a tube like the one shown in Figure 22.22. Electrons in a material such as a ruby crystal are stimulated to radiate photons of light of one wavelength. At each end of the tube is a concave mirror. The photons of light bounce back and forth in the tube off the mirrors. This focuses the light. The mirror at one end of the tube is partly transparent. A constant stream of photons passes through the transparent part, forming the laser beam. You can see an animation showing how a laser works at this URL:  (1:12). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Besides entertaining a cat, laser light has many other uses. It is used to scan bar codes, for example, and to carry communication signals in optical fibers. Optical fibers are extremely thin glass tubes that are used to guide laser light (see Figure 22.23). Sounds or pictures are encoded in pulses of laser light, which are then sent through an optical fiber. All of the light reflects off the inside of the fiber, so none of it escapes. As a result, the signal remains strong even over long distances. More than one signal can travel through an optic fiber at the same time, as you can see in Figure 22.23. Optical fibers are used to carry telephone, cable TV, and Internet signals. 	a laser beam consists of photons of light of a single wavelength	true
Mirrors and lenses are used in optical instruments to reflect and refract light. Optical instruments include micro- scopes, telescopes, cameras, and lasers. 	a reflecting telescope does not refract light	false
A light microscope is an instrument that uses lenses to make enlarged images of objects that are too small for the unaided eye to see. A common type of light microscope is a compound microscope, like the one in Figure 22.18. A compound microscope has at least two convex lenses: one or more objective lenses and one or more eyepiece lenses. The objective lenses are close to the object being viewed. They form an enlarged image of the object inside the microscope. The eyepiece lenses are close to the viewers eyes. They form an enlarged image of the first image. The magnifications of all the lenses are multiplied together to yield the overall magnification of the microscope. Some light microscopes can magnify objects more than 1000 times! For more on light microscopes and the images they create, watch the video at this URL:  (7:29). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	magnifications of all the lenses of a microscope are added to yield the overall magnification of the	false
Although the speed of light is constant in a vacuum, light travels at different speeds in different kinds of matter. For example, light travels more slowly in glass than in air. Therefore, when light passes from air to glass, it slows down. If light strikes a sheet of glass straight on, or perpendicular to the glass, it slows down but passes straight through. However, if light enters the glass at an angle other than 90 , the wave refracts, or bends. This is illustrated in Figure change in speed, the more light bends. 	light refracts when it enters a new medium at an angle other than 90 	true
Mirrors and lenses are used in optical instruments to reflect and refract light. Optical instruments include micro- scopes, telescopes, cameras, and lasers. 	only mirrors reflect light and form images	false
Most mirrors are plane mirrors. A plane mirror has a flat reflective surface and forms only virtual images. The image formed by a plane mirror is also life sized. But something is different about the image compared with the real object in front of the mirror. Left and right are reversed. Look at the man shaving in Figure 22.12. He is using his right hand to hold the razor, but his image appears to be holding the razor in the left hand. Almost all plane mirrors reverse left and right in this way. 	all mirrors can form virtual images	true
Most mirrors are plane mirrors. A plane mirror has a flat reflective surface and forms only virtual images. The image formed by a plane mirror is also life sized. But something is different about the image compared with the real object in front of the mirror. Left and right are reversed. Look at the man shaving in Figure 22.12. He is using his right hand to hold the razor, but his image appears to be holding the razor in the left hand. Almost all plane mirrors reverse left and right in this way. 	the image formed by a plane mirror looks exactly like the object in every way	false
Some mirrors have a curved rather than flat surface. Curved mirrors can be concave or convex. A concave mirror is shaped like the inside of a bowl. This type of mirror forms either real or virtual images, depending on where the object is placed relative to the focal point. The focal point is the point in front of the mirror where the reflected rays intersect. You can see how concave mirrors form images in Figure 22.13 and in the interactive animation at the URL below. The animation allows you to move an object to see how its position affects the image. Concave mirrors are used behind car headlights. They focus the light and make it brighter. They are also used in some telescopes. 	the focal point of a concave mirror is the point in front of the mirror where reflected rays intersect	true
Most mirrors are plane mirrors. A plane mirror has a flat reflective surface and forms only virtual images. The image formed by a plane mirror is also life sized. But something is different about the image compared with the real object in front of the mirror. Left and right are reversed. Look at the man shaving in Figure 22.12. He is using his right hand to hold the razor, but his image appears to be holding the razor in the left hand. Almost all plane mirrors reverse left and right in this way. 	a concave mirror can form only virtual images	false
Most mirrors are plane mirrors. A plane mirror has a flat reflective surface and forms only virtual images. The image formed by a plane mirror is also life sized. But something is different about the image compared with the real object in front of the mirror. Left and right are reversed. Look at the man shaving in Figure 22.12. He is using his right hand to hold the razor, but his image appears to be holding the razor in the left hand. Almost all plane mirrors reverse left and right in this way. 	the image formed by a convex mirror is always upright and reduced in size	true
Although the speed of light is constant in a vacuum, light travels at different speeds in different kinds of matter. For example, light travels more slowly in glass than in air. Therefore, when light passes from air to glass, it slows down. If light strikes a sheet of glass straight on, or perpendicular to the glass, it slows down but passes straight through. However, if light enters the glass at an angle other than 90 , the wave refracts, or bends. This is illustrated in Figure change in speed, the more light bends. 	light travels more quickly through glass than through air	false
Lenses make use of the refraction of light to create images. A lens is a transparent object, typically made of glass, with one or two curved surfaces. The more curved the surface of a lens is, the more it refracts light. Like mirrors, lenses may be concave or convex. 	the more curved the surface of a lens is the more it refracts light	true
Lenses make use of the refraction of light to create images. A lens is a transparent object, typically made of glass, with one or two curved surfaces. The more curved the surface of a lens is, the more it refracts light. Like mirrors, lenses may be concave or convex. 	the lens in a camera is a convex lens	false
Convex lenses are thicker in the middle than at the edges. They cause rays of light to converge, or meet, at a point called the focus (F). Convex lenses form either real or virtual images. It depends on how close an object is to the lens relative to the focus. Figure 22.17 shows how a convex lens works. You can also interact with an animated convex lens at the URL below. An example of a convex lens is a hand lens. 	a refracting telescope uses a convex lens to collect and focus light	true
Many people have vision problems. The problems often can be corrected with contact lenses or lenses in eyeglasses. Some vision problems can also be corrected with laser surgery, which reshapes the cornea. Two of the most common vision problems are nearsightedness and farsightedness. You may even have one of these conditions yourself. Both are illustrated in Figure 22.26 and in the video at this URL:  (1:08). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Nearsightedness, or myopia, is the condition in which nearby objects are seen clearly, but distant objects are blurry. It occurs when the eyeball is longer than normal. This causes images to be focused in front of the retina. Myopia can be corrected with concave lenses. The lenses focus images farther back in the eye, so they are on the retina instead of in front of it. Farsightedness, or hyperopia, is the condition in which distant objects are seen clearly, but nearby objects are blurry. It occurs when the eyeball is shorter than normal. This causes images to be focused in back of the retina. Hyperopia can be corrected with convex lenses. The lenses focus images farther forward in the eye, so they are on the retina instead of behind it. 	one function of the cornea is to protect the eye	true
As just described, the eyes collect and focus visible light. The lens and other structures of the eye work together to focus a real image on the retina. The image is upside-down and reduced in size, as you can see in Figure 22.25. The image reaches the brain as electrical signals that travel through the optic nerve. The brain interprets the signals as shape, color, and brightness. It also interprets the image as though it were right-side up. The brain does this automatically, so what we see is always right-side up. The brain also tells us what we are seeing. 	the role of the pupil is to help focus light	false
Many people have vision problems. The problems often can be corrected with contact lenses or lenses in eyeglasses. Some vision problems can also be corrected with laser surgery, which reshapes the cornea. Two of the most common vision problems are nearsightedness and farsightedness. You may even have one of these conditions yourself. Both are illustrated in Figure 22.26 and in the video at this URL:  (1:08). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Nearsightedness, or myopia, is the condition in which nearby objects are seen clearly, but distant objects are blurry. It occurs when the eyeball is longer than normal. This causes images to be focused in front of the retina. Myopia can be corrected with concave lenses. The lenses focus images farther back in the eye, so they are on the retina instead of in front of it. Farsightedness, or hyperopia, is the condition in which distant objects are seen clearly, but nearby objects are blurry. It occurs when the eyeball is shorter than normal. This causes images to be focused in back of the retina. Hyperopia can be corrected with convex lenses. The lenses focus images farther forward in the eye, so they are on the retina instead of behind it. 	images formed by the eye are upright and virtual	false
As just described, the eyes collect and focus visible light. The lens and other structures of the eye work together to focus a real image on the retina. The image is upside-down and reduced in size, as you can see in Figure 22.25. The image reaches the brain as electrical signals that travel through the optic nerve. The brain interprets the signals as shape, color, and brightness. It also interprets the image as though it were right-side up. The brain does this automatically, so what we see is always right-side up. The brain also tells us what we are seeing. 	we can see only if information from the eyes reaches the brain	true
The structure of the human eye is shown in Figure 22.24. Find each structure in the diagram as you read about it below. The cornea is the transparent outer covering of the eye. It protects the eye and also acts as a convex lens, helping to focus light that enters the eye. The pupil is an opening in the front of the eye. It looks black because it doesnt reflect any light. It allows light to enter the eye. The pupil automatically gets bigger or smaller to let more or less light in as needed. The iris is the colored part of the eye. It controls the size of the pupil. The lens is a convex lens that fine-tunes the focus so an image forms on the back of the eye. Tiny muscles control the shape of the lens to focus images of close or distant objects. The retina is a membrane lining the back of the eye. The retina has nerve cells called rods and cones that change images to electrical signals. Rods are good at sensing dim light but cant distinguish different colors of light. Cones can sense colors but not in dim light. There are three different types of cones. Each type senses one of the three primary colors of light. The optic nerve carries electrical signals from the rods and cones to the brain. 	rods can sense dim light but not colors of light	true
As just described, the eyes collect and focus visible light. The lens and other structures of the eye work together to focus a real image on the retina. The image is upside-down and reduced in size, as you can see in Figure 22.25. The image reaches the brain as electrical signals that travel through the optic nerve. The brain interprets the signals as shape, color, and brightness. It also interprets the image as though it were right-side up. The brain does this automatically, so what we see is always right-side up. The brain also tells us what we are seeing. 	the eyes and brain work together to enable vision	true
As just described, the eyes collect and focus visible light. The lens and other structures of the eye work together to focus a real image on the retina. The image is upside-down and reduced in size, as you can see in Figure 22.25. The image reaches the brain as electrical signals that travel through the optic nerve. The brain interprets the signals as shape, color, and brightness. It also interprets the image as though it were right-side up. The brain does this automatically, so what we see is always right-side up. The brain also tells us what we are seeing. 	the pupil helps to focus light that enters the eye	false
As just described, the eyes collect and focus visible light. The lens and other structures of the eye work together to focus a real image on the retina. The image is upside-down and reduced in size, as you can see in Figure 22.25. The image reaches the brain as electrical signals that travel through the optic nerve. The brain interprets the signals as shape, color, and brightness. It also interprets the image as though it were right-side up. The brain does this automatically, so what we see is always right-side up. The brain also tells us what we are seeing. 	the lens changes shape to focus images of close or distant objects	true
The structure of the human eye is shown in Figure 22.24. Find each structure in the diagram as you read about it below. The cornea is the transparent outer covering of the eye. It protects the eye and also acts as a convex lens, helping to focus light that enters the eye. The pupil is an opening in the front of the eye. It looks black because it doesnt reflect any light. It allows light to enter the eye. The pupil automatically gets bigger or smaller to let more or less light in as needed. The iris is the colored part of the eye. It controls the size of the pupil. The lens is a convex lens that fine-tunes the focus so an image forms on the back of the eye. Tiny muscles control the shape of the lens to focus images of close or distant objects. The retina is a membrane lining the back of the eye. The retina has nerve cells called rods and cones that change images to electrical signals. Rods are good at sensing dim light but cant distinguish different colors of light. Cones can sense colors but not in dim light. There are three different types of cones. Each type senses one of the three primary colors of light. The optic nerve carries electrical signals from the rods and cones to the brain. 	there are two different types of rods in the retina	false
As just described, the eyes collect and focus visible light. The lens and other structures of the eye work together to focus a real image on the retina. The image is upside-down and reduced in size, as you can see in Figure 22.25. The image reaches the brain as electrical signals that travel through the optic nerve. The brain interprets the signals as shape, color, and brightness. It also interprets the image as though it were right-side up. The brain does this automatically, so what we see is always right-side up. The brain also tells us what we are seeing. 	the brain interprets signals from the retina as shape color and brightness	true
As just described, the eyes collect and focus visible light. The lens and other structures of the eye work together to focus a real image on the retina. The image is upside-down and reduced in size, as you can see in Figure 22.25. The image reaches the brain as electrical signals that travel through the optic nerve. The brain interprets the signals as shape, color, and brightness. It also interprets the image as though it were right-side up. The brain does this automatically, so what we see is always right-side up. The brain also tells us what we are seeing. 	the brain interprets images on the retina as though they were upright	true
Many people have vision problems. The problems often can be corrected with contact lenses or lenses in eyeglasses. Some vision problems can also be corrected with laser surgery, which reshapes the cornea. Two of the most common vision problems are nearsightedness and farsightedness. You may even have one of these conditions yourself. Both are illustrated in Figure 22.26 and in the video at this URL:  (1:08). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Nearsightedness, or myopia, is the condition in which nearby objects are seen clearly, but distant objects are blurry. It occurs when the eyeball is longer than normal. This causes images to be focused in front of the retina. Myopia can be corrected with concave lenses. The lenses focus images farther back in the eye, so they are on the retina instead of in front of it. Farsightedness, or hyperopia, is the condition in which distant objects are seen clearly, but nearby objects are blurry. It occurs when the eyeball is shorter than normal. This causes images to be focused in back of the retina. Hyperopia can be corrected with convex lenses. The lenses focus images farther forward in the eye, so they are on the retina instead of behind it. 	laser surgery corrects vision problems by changing the shape of the lens	false
The structure of the human eye is shown in Figure 22.24. Find each structure in the diagram as you read about it below. The cornea is the transparent outer covering of the eye. It protects the eye and also acts as a convex lens, helping to focus light that enters the eye. The pupil is an opening in the front of the eye. It looks black because it doesnt reflect any light. It allows light to enter the eye. The pupil automatically gets bigger or smaller to let more or less light in as needed. The iris is the colored part of the eye. It controls the size of the pupil. The lens is a convex lens that fine-tunes the focus so an image forms on the back of the eye. Tiny muscles control the shape of the lens to focus images of close or distant objects. The retina is a membrane lining the back of the eye. The retina has nerve cells called rods and cones that change images to electrical signals. Rods are good at sensing dim light but cant distinguish different colors of light. Cones can sense colors but not in dim light. There are three different types of cones. Each type senses one of the three primary colors of light. The optic nerve carries electrical signals from the rods and cones to the brain. 	the role of the iris is to control the size of the pupil	true
As just described, the eyes collect and focus visible light. The lens and other structures of the eye work together to focus a real image on the retina. The image is upside-down and reduced in size, as you can see in Figure 22.25. The image reaches the brain as electrical signals that travel through the optic nerve. The brain interprets the signals as shape, color, and brightness. It also interprets the image as though it were right-side up. The brain does this automatically, so what we see is always right-side up. The brain also tells us what we are seeing. 	the lens normally focuses images on the optic nerve	false
Many people have vision problems. The problems often can be corrected with contact lenses or lenses in eyeglasses. Some vision problems can also be corrected with laser surgery, which reshapes the cornea. Two of the most common vision problems are nearsightedness and farsightedness. You may even have one of these conditions yourself. Both are illustrated in Figure 22.26 and in the video at this URL:  (1:08). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Nearsightedness, or myopia, is the condition in which nearby objects are seen clearly, but distant objects are blurry. It occurs when the eyeball is longer than normal. This causes images to be focused in front of the retina. Myopia can be corrected with concave lenses. The lenses focus images farther back in the eye, so they are on the retina instead of in front of it. Farsightedness, or hyperopia, is the condition in which distant objects are seen clearly, but nearby objects are blurry. It occurs when the eyeball is shorter than normal. This causes images to be focused in back of the retina. Hyperopia can be corrected with convex lenses. The lenses focus images farther forward in the eye, so they are on the retina instead of behind it. 	hyperopia is also called nearsightedness	false
As just described, the eyes collect and focus visible light. The lens and other structures of the eye work together to focus a real image on the retina. The image is upside-down and reduced in size, as you can see in Figure 22.25. The image reaches the brain as electrical signals that travel through the optic nerve. The brain interprets the signals as shape, color, and brightness. It also interprets the image as though it were right-side up. The brain does this automatically, so what we see is always right-side up. The brain also tells us what we are seeing. 	nerve cell in the retina that senses dim light	1.b
As just described, the eyes collect and focus visible light. The lens and other structures of the eye work together to focus a real image on the retina. The image is upside-down and reduced in size, as you can see in Figure 22.25. The image reaches the brain as electrical signals that travel through the optic nerve. The brain interprets the signals as shape, color, and brightness. It also interprets the image as though it were right-side up. The brain does this automatically, so what we see is always right-side up. The brain also tells us what we are seeing. 	colored part of the eye	2.e
The structure of the human eye is shown in Figure 22.24. Find each structure in the diagram as you read about it below. The cornea is the transparent outer covering of the eye. It protects the eye and also acts as a convex lens, helping to focus light that enters the eye. The pupil is an opening in the front of the eye. It looks black because it doesnt reflect any light. It allows light to enter the eye. The pupil automatically gets bigger or smaller to let more or less light in as needed. The iris is the colored part of the eye. It controls the size of the pupil. The lens is a convex lens that fine-tunes the focus so an image forms on the back of the eye. Tiny muscles control the shape of the lens to focus images of close or distant objects. The retina is a membrane lining the back of the eye. The retina has nerve cells called rods and cones that change images to electrical signals. Rods are good at sensing dim light but cant distinguish different colors of light. Cones can sense colors but not in dim light. There are three different types of cones. Each type senses one of the three primary colors of light. The optic nerve carries electrical signals from the rods and cones to the brain. 	opening at the front of the eye that lets in light	3.g
As just described, the eyes collect and focus visible light. The lens and other structures of the eye work together to focus a real image on the retina. The image is upside-down and reduced in size, as you can see in Figure 22.25. The image reaches the brain as electrical signals that travel through the optic nerve. The brain interprets the signals as shape, color, and brightness. It also interprets the image as though it were right-side up. The brain does this automatically, so what we see is always right-side up. The brain also tells us what we are seeing. 	nerve cell in the retina that senses colors of light	4.d
As just described, the eyes collect and focus visible light. The lens and other structures of the eye work together to focus a real image on the retina. The image is upside-down and reduced in size, as you can see in Figure 22.25. The image reaches the brain as electrical signals that travel through the optic nerve. The brain interprets the signals as shape, color, and brightness. It also interprets the image as though it were right-side up. The brain does this automatically, so what we see is always right-side up. The brain also tells us what we are seeing. 	organ specialized to collect light and focus images	5.a
The structure of the human eye is shown in Figure 22.24. Find each structure in the diagram as you read about it below. The cornea is the transparent outer covering of the eye. It protects the eye and also acts as a convex lens, helping to focus light that enters the eye. The pupil is an opening in the front of the eye. It looks black because it doesnt reflect any light. It allows light to enter the eye. The pupil automatically gets bigger or smaller to let more or less light in as needed. The iris is the colored part of the eye. It controls the size of the pupil. The lens is a convex lens that fine-tunes the focus so an image forms on the back of the eye. Tiny muscles control the shape of the lens to focus images of close or distant objects. The retina is a membrane lining the back of the eye. The retina has nerve cells called rods and cones that change images to electrical signals. Rods are good at sensing dim light but cant distinguish different colors of light. Cones can sense colors but not in dim light. There are three different types of cones. Each type senses one of the three primary colors of light. The optic nerve carries electrical signals from the rods and cones to the brain. 	transparent outer covering of the eye	6.c
The structure of the human eye is shown in Figure 22.24. Find each structure in the diagram as you read about it below. The cornea is the transparent outer covering of the eye. It protects the eye and also acts as a convex lens, helping to focus light that enters the eye. The pupil is an opening in the front of the eye. It looks black because it doesnt reflect any light. It allows light to enter the eye. The pupil automatically gets bigger or smaller to let more or less light in as needed. The iris is the colored part of the eye. It controls the size of the pupil. The lens is a convex lens that fine-tunes the focus so an image forms on the back of the eye. Tiny muscles control the shape of the lens to focus images of close or distant objects. The retina is a membrane lining the back of the eye. The retina has nerve cells called rods and cones that change images to electrical signals. Rods are good at sensing dim light but cant distinguish different colors of light. Cones can sense colors but not in dim light. There are three different types of cones. Each type senses one of the three primary colors of light. The optic nerve carries electrical signals from the rods and cones to the brain. 	membrane lining the back of the eye	7.f
The force that a magnet exerts on certain materials is called magnetic force. Like electric force, magnetic force is exerted over a distance and includes forces of attraction and repulsion. North and south poles of two magnets attract each other, while two north poles or two south poles repel each other. 	some magnets have just one magnetic pole	false
The force that a magnet exerts on certain materials is called magnetic force. Like electric force, magnetic force is exerted over a distance and includes forces of attraction and repulsion. North and south poles of two magnets attract each other, while two north poles or two south poles repel each other. 	bringing together the north poles of two magnets demagnetizes them	false
The force that a magnet exerts on certain materials is called magnetic force. Like electric force, magnetic force is exerted over a distance and includes forces of attraction and repulsion. North and south poles of two magnets attract each other, while two north poles or two south poles repel each other. 	a magnet will attract any material that contains iron	true
Magnetism is due to the movement of electrons within atoms of matter. When electrons spin around the nucleus of an atom, it causes the atom to become a tiny magnet, with north and south poles and a magnetic field. In most materials, the electrons orbiting the nuclei of the atoms are arranged in such a way that the materials have no magnetic properties. Also, in most types of matter, the north and south poles of atoms point in all different directions, so overall the matter is not magnetic. Examples of nonmagnetic materials include wood, glass, plastic, paper, copper, and aluminum. These materials are not attracted to magnets and cannot become magnets. In other materials, electrons fill the orbitals of the atoms that make up the material in a way to allow for each atom to have a tiny magnetic field, giving each atom a tiny north and south pole. There are large areas where the north and south poles of atoms are all lined up in the same direction. These areas are called magnetic domains. Generally, the magnetic domains point in different directions, so the material is still not magnetic. However, the material can be magnetized by placing it in a magnetic field. When this happens, all the magnetic domains become aligned, and the material becomes a magnet. This is illustrated in Figure 24.6. Materials that can be magnetized are called ferromagnetic materials. They include iron, cobalt, and nickel. 	an atom is a tiny magnet because its electrons spin around its nucleus	true
The force that a magnet exerts on certain materials is called magnetic force. Like electric force, magnetic force is exerted over a distance and includes forces of attraction and repulsion. North and south poles of two magnets attract each other, while two north poles or two south poles repel each other. 	only ferromagnetic materials are affected by magnetic force	true
Magnetism is due to the movement of electrons within atoms of matter. When electrons spin around the nucleus of an atom, it causes the atom to become a tiny magnet, with north and south poles and a magnetic field. In most materials, the electrons orbiting the nuclei of the atoms are arranged in such a way that the materials have no magnetic properties. Also, in most types of matter, the north and south poles of atoms point in all different directions, so overall the matter is not magnetic. Examples of nonmagnetic materials include wood, glass, plastic, paper, copper, and aluminum. These materials are not attracted to magnets and cannot become magnets. In other materials, electrons fill the orbitals of the atoms that make up the material in a way to allow for each atom to have a tiny magnetic field, giving each atom a tiny north and south pole. There are large areas where the north and south poles of atoms are all lined up in the same direction. These areas are called magnetic domains. Generally, the magnetic domains point in different directions, so the material is still not magnetic. However, the material can be magnetized by placing it in a magnetic field. When this happens, all the magnetic domains become aligned, and the material becomes a magnet. This is illustrated in Figure 24.6. Materials that can be magnetized are called ferromagnetic materials. They include iron, cobalt, and nickel. 	copper and aluminum are attracted by magnets	false
Magnetism is due to the movement of electrons within atoms of matter. When electrons spin around the nucleus of an atom, it causes the atom to become a tiny magnet, with north and south poles and a magnetic field. In most materials, the electrons orbiting the nuclei of the atoms are arranged in such a way that the materials have no magnetic properties. Also, in most types of matter, the north and south poles of atoms point in all different directions, so overall the matter is not magnetic. Examples of nonmagnetic materials include wood, glass, plastic, paper, copper, and aluminum. These materials are not attracted to magnets and cannot become magnets. In other materials, electrons fill the orbitals of the atoms that make up the material in a way to allow for each atom to have a tiny magnetic field, giving each atom a tiny north and south pole. There are large areas where the north and south poles of atoms are all lined up in the same direction. These areas are called magnetic domains. Generally, the magnetic domains point in different directions, so the material is still not magnetic. However, the material can be magnetized by placing it in a magnetic field. When this happens, all the magnetic domains become aligned, and the material becomes a magnet. This is illustrated in Figure 24.6. Materials that can be magnetized are called ferromagnetic materials. They include iron, cobalt, and nickel. 	for a ferromagnetic material to become magnetic its magnetic domains must be aligned	true
A magnet is an object that attracts certain materials such as iron. Youre probably familiar with common bar magnets, like the one in Figure 24.2. Like all magnets, this bar magnet has north and south poles and attracts objects such as paper clips that contain iron. 	iron is the only ferromagnetic material	false
Materials that have been magnetized may become temporary or permanent magnets. An example of each type of magnet is described below. Both are demonstrated in Figure 24.7. If you bring a bar magnet close to pile of paper clips, the paper clips will become temporarily magnetized, as all their magnetic domains align. As a result, the paper clips will stick to the magnet and also to each other. However, if you remove the paper clips from the bar magnets magnetic field, their magnetic domains will no longer align. As a result, the paper clips will no longer be magnetized or stick together. If you stroke an iron nail with a bar magnet, the nail will become a permanent (or at least long-lasting) magnet. Its magnetic domains will remain aligned even after you remove it from the magnetic field of the bar magnet. Permanent magnets can be demagnetized, however, if they are dropped or heated to high temperatures. These actions move the magnetic domains out of alignment. 	only temporary magnets can be demagnetized	false
A magnet is an object that attracts certain materials such as iron. Youre probably familiar with common bar magnets, like the one in Figure 24.2. Like all magnets, this bar magnet has north and south poles and attracts objects such as paper clips that contain iron. 	while paper clips are clinging to a bar magnet they are temporary magnets	true
Magnetism is the ability of a material to be attracted by a magnet and to act as a magnet. No doubt youve handled refrigerator magnets like the ones in Figure 24.5. You probably know first-hand that they stick to a metal refrigerator but not to surfaces such as wooden doors and glass windows. Wood and glass arent attracted to a magnet, whereas the steel refrigerator is. Obviously, only certain materials respond to magnetic force. 	the most magnetic material in nature is magnetite	true
A magnet is an object that attracts certain materials such as iron. Youre probably familiar with common bar magnets, like the one in Figure 24.2. Like all magnets, this bar magnet has north and south poles and attracts objects such as paper clips that contain iron. 	an iron nail can be turned into a permanent magnet	true
Materials that have been magnetized may become temporary or permanent magnets. An example of each type of magnet is described below. Both are demonstrated in Figure 24.7. If you bring a bar magnet close to pile of paper clips, the paper clips will become temporarily magnetized, as all their magnetic domains align. As a result, the paper clips will stick to the magnet and also to each other. However, if you remove the paper clips from the bar magnets magnetic field, their magnetic domains will no longer align. As a result, the paper clips will no longer be magnetized or stick together. If you stroke an iron nail with a bar magnet, the nail will become a permanent (or at least long-lasting) magnet. Its magnetic domains will remain aligned even after you remove it from the magnetic field of the bar magnet. Permanent magnets can be demagnetized, however, if they are dropped or heated to high temperatures. These actions move the magnetic domains out of alignment. 	permanent magnets can never be demagnetized	false
The force that a magnet exerts on certain materials is called magnetic force. Like electric force, magnetic force is exerted over a distance and includes forces of attraction and repulsion. North and south poles of two magnets attract each other, while two north poles or two south poles repel each other. 	magnetite is a naturally occurring permanent magnet	true
The force that a magnet exerts on certain materials is called magnetic force. Like electric force, magnetic force is exerted over a distance and includes forces of attraction and repulsion. North and south poles of two magnets attract each other, while two north poles or two south poles repel each other. 	the magnetic properties of lodestone were discovered only recently	false
The force that a magnet exerts on certain materials is called magnetic force. Like electric force, magnetic force is exerted over a distance and includes forces of attraction and repulsion. North and south poles of two magnets attract each other, while two north poles or two south poles repel each other. 	force of attraction or repulsion exerted by a magnet	1.e
A magnet is an object that attracts certain materials such as iron. Youre probably familiar with common bar magnets, like the one in Figure 24.2. Like all magnets, this bar magnet has north and south poles and attracts objects such as paper clips that contain iron. 	object that attracts ferromagnetic materials	2.b
A magnet is an object that attracts certain materials such as iron. Youre probably familiar with common bar magnets, like the one in Figure 24.2. Like all magnets, this bar magnet has north and south poles and attracts objects such as paper clips that contain iron. 	iron nickel or cobalt	3.a
The force that a magnet exerts on certain materials is called magnetic force. Like electric force, magnetic force is exerted over a distance and includes forces of attraction and repulsion. North and south poles of two magnets attract each other, while two north poles or two south poles repel each other. 	north or south end of a magnet	4.f
The force that a magnet exerts on certain materials is called magnetic force. Like electric force, magnetic force is exerted over a distance and includes forces of attraction and repulsion. North and south poles of two magnets attract each other, while two north poles or two south poles repel each other. 	area around a magnet where it exerts force	5. d
Magnetism is the ability of a material to be attracted by a magnet and to act as a magnet. No doubt youve handled refrigerator magnets like the ones in Figure 24.5. You probably know first-hand that they stick to a metal refrigerator but not to surfaces such as wooden doors and glass windows. Wood and glass arent attracted to a magnet, whereas the steel refrigerator is. Obviously, only certain materials respond to magnetic force. 	ability of a material to respond to and exert magnetic force	6. g
Magnetism is due to the movement of electrons within atoms of matter. When electrons spin around the nucleus of an atom, it causes the atom to become a tiny magnet, with north and south poles and a magnetic field. In most materials, the electrons orbiting the nuclei of the atoms are arranged in such a way that the materials have no magnetic properties. Also, in most types of matter, the north and south poles of atoms point in all different directions, so overall the matter is not magnetic. Examples of nonmagnetic materials include wood, glass, plastic, paper, copper, and aluminum. These materials are not attracted to magnets and cannot become magnets. In other materials, electrons fill the orbitals of the atoms that make up the material in a way to allow for each atom to have a tiny magnetic field, giving each atom a tiny north and south pole. There are large areas where the north and south poles of atoms are all lined up in the same direction. These areas are called magnetic domains. Generally, the magnetic domains point in different directions, so the material is still not magnetic. However, the material can be magnetized by placing it in a magnetic field. When this happens, all the magnetic domains become aligned, and the material becomes a magnet. This is illustrated in Figure 24.6. Materials that can be magnetized are called ferromagnetic materials. They include iron, cobalt, and nickel. 	area of a ferromagnetic material where the poles of atoms are aligned in the same direction	7. c
Although a compass always points north, it doesnt point to Earths geographic north pole, which is located at 90 north latitude (see Figure 24.11). Instead, it points to Earths magnetic north pole, which is located at about 80 north latitude. Earths magnetic south pole is also located several degrees of latitude away from the geographic south pole. A compass pointer has north and south poles, and its north pole points to Earths magnetic north pole. Why does this happen if opposite poles attract? Why doesnt the compass needle point south instead? The answer may surprise you. Earths magnetic north pole is actually the south pole of magnet Earth! Its called the magnetic north pole to avoid confusion. Because its close to the geographic north pole, it would be confusing to call it the magnetic south pole. 	the north end of a compass needle always points to 90 north latitude	false
Like all magnets, Earth has a magnetic field. Earths magnetic field is called the magnetosphere. It is a huge region that extends outward from Earth for several thousand kilometers but is strongest at the poles. You can see the extent of the magnetosphere in Figure 24.12. For an animated version of the magnetosphere, watch the video at this URL: MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	earths magnetic field extends outward from the planet in all directions	true
Imagine a huge bar magnet passing through Earths axis, as illustrated in Figure 24.10. This is a good representation of Earth as a magnet. Like a bar magnet, Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field. 	earths magnetic poles have switched places many times over the past hundred years	false
Do you like to read science fiction? Science fiction writers are really creative. For example, an author might write about a time in the distant past when compasses pointed south instead of north. Actually, this idea isnt fictionits a fact! Earths magnetic poles have switched places repeatedly over the past hundreds of millions of years, each time reversing Earths magnetic field. This is illustrated in Figure 24.13. Scientists dont know for certain why magnetic reversals occur, but there is hard evidence showing that they have occurred. The evidence comes from rocks on the ocean floor. Look at Figure 24.14, which shows a ridge on the ocean floor. At the center of the ridge, hot magma pushes up through the crust and hardens into rock. Once the magma hardens, the alignment of magnetic domains in the rock is frozen in place forever. The newly hardened rock is then gradually pushed away from the ridge in both directions as more magma erupts and newer rock forms. Rock samples from many places on the ocean floor reveal that magnetic domains of rocks from different time periods are aligned in opposite directions. The evidence shows that Earths magnetic field reversed hundreds of times over the last 330 million years. The last reversal was less than a million years ago. What might happen if a magnetic reversal occurred in your lifetime? How might it affect you? You can learn more about Earths magnetic reversals at this URL:  . 	once molten rocks harden their magnetic domains are frozen in place forever	true
The idea that Earth is a magnet is far from new. It was first proposed in 1600 by a British physician named William Gilbert. However, explaining why Earth acts like a magnet is a relatively recent discovery. It had to wait until the development of technologies such as seismographs, which detect and measure earthquake waves. Then scientists could learn about Earths inner structure (see Figure 24.15). They discovered that Earth has an inner and outer core and that the outer core consists of liquid metals, mainly iron and nickel. Scientists think that Earths magnetic field is generated by the movement of charged particles through the molten metals in the outer core. The particles move as Earth spins on its axis. The video at the URL below takes a closer look at how this occurs. MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	earths outer core is made up mainly of iron and nickel	true
Imagine a huge bar magnet passing through Earths axis, as illustrated in Figure 24.10. This is a good representation of Earth as a magnet. Like a bar magnet, Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field. 	charged particles move inside earth when it spins on its axis	true
Imagine a huge bar magnet passing through Earths axis, as illustrated in Figure 24.10. This is a good representation of Earth as a magnet. Like a bar magnet, Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field. 	harmful particles from the sun are repelled by earths magnetic poles	false
The idea that Earth is a magnet is far from new. It was first proposed in 1600 by a British physician named William Gilbert. However, explaining why Earth acts like a magnet is a relatively recent discovery. It had to wait until the development of technologies such as seismographs, which detect and measure earthquake waves. Then scientists could learn about Earths inner structure (see Figure 24.15). They discovered that Earth has an inner and outer core and that the outer core consists of liquid metals, mainly iron and nickel. Scientists think that Earths magnetic field is generated by the movement of charged particles through the molten metals in the outer core. The particles move as Earth spins on its axis. The video at the URL below takes a closer look at how this occurs. MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	magnetic reversals were discovered by william gilbert in 1600	false
Although a compass always points north, it doesnt point to Earths geographic north pole, which is located at 90 north latitude (see Figure 24.11). Instead, it points to Earths magnetic north pole, which is located at about 80 north latitude. Earths magnetic south pole is also located several degrees of latitude away from the geographic south pole. A compass pointer has north and south poles, and its north pole points to Earths magnetic north pole. Why does this happen if opposite poles attract? Why doesnt the compass needle point south instead? The answer may surprise you. Earths magnetic north pole is actually the south pole of magnet Earth! Its called the magnetic north pole to avoid confusion. Because its close to the geographic north pole, it would be confusing to call it the magnetic south pole. 	earths south magnetic pole is the same as earths south geographic pole	false
Imagine a huge bar magnet passing through Earths axis, as illustrated in Figure 24.10. This is a good representation of Earth as a magnet. Like a bar magnet, Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field. 	migrating birds may detect earths magnetic field with structures in their eyes	true
Imagine a huge bar magnet passing through Earths axis, as illustrated in Figure 24.10. This is a good representation of Earth as a magnet. Like a bar magnet, Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field. 	earth has north and south magnetic poles like a bar magnet	true
Imagine a huge bar magnet passing through Earths axis, as illustrated in Figure 24.10. This is a good representation of Earth as a magnet. Like a bar magnet, Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field. 	earths magnetic and geographic poles are located in the same places	false
Northern California residents may not be able to see the northern lights like people in Alaska can, but Bay Area scientists are playing a key role in understanding them. Find out more about the spectacular light shows up north and what scientists at UC Berkeley are discovering about the Earths magnetic field. For more information on the northern lights, see http://science.kqed.org/quest/video/illuminating-the-northern-lights/ . MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	scientists no longer accept the idea of magnetic reversals	false
Imagine a huge bar magnet passing through Earths axis, as illustrated in Figure 24.10. This is a good representation of Earth as a magnet. Like a bar magnet, Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field. 	earths magnetic field occurs only over the north and south poles	false
Imagine a huge bar magnet passing through Earths axis, as illustrated in Figure 24.10. This is a good representation of Earth as a magnet. Like a bar magnet, Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field. 	earths magnetic force is exerted over a distance	true
Although a compass always points north, it doesnt point to Earths geographic north pole, which is located at 90 north latitude (see Figure 24.11). Instead, it points to Earths magnetic north pole, which is located at about 80 north latitude. Earths magnetic south pole is also located several degrees of latitude away from the geographic south pole. A compass pointer has north and south poles, and its north pole points to Earths magnetic north pole. Why does this happen if opposite poles attract? Why doesnt the compass needle point south instead? The answer may surprise you. Earths magnetic north pole is actually the south pole of magnet Earth! Its called the magnetic north pole to avoid confusion. Because its close to the geographic north pole, it would be confusing to call it the magnetic south pole. 	about 80 north latitude	1.d
Imagine a huge bar magnet passing through Earths axis, as illustrated in Figure 24.10. This is a good representation of Earth as a magnet. Like a bar magnet, Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field. 	solid sphere that makes up earths center	2.g
Although a compass always points north, it doesnt point to Earths geographic north pole, which is located at 90 north latitude (see Figure 24.11). Instead, it points to Earths magnetic north pole, which is located at about 80 north latitude. Earths magnetic south pole is also located several degrees of latitude away from the geographic south pole. A compass pointer has north and south poles, and its north pole points to Earths magnetic north pole. Why does this happen if opposite poles attract? Why doesnt the compass needle point south instead? The answer may surprise you. Earths magnetic north pole is actually the south pole of magnet Earth! Its called the magnetic north pole to avoid confusion. Because its close to the geographic north pole, it would be confusing to call it the magnetic south pole. 	exactly 90 north latitude	3.b
Like all magnets, Earth has a magnetic field. Earths magnetic field is called the magnetosphere. It is a huge region that extends outward from Earth for several thousand kilometers but is strongest at the poles. You can see the extent of the magnetosphere in Figure 24.12. For an animated version of the magnetosphere, watch the video at this URL: MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	region deep inside earth that consists of liquid metals	4.c
Imagine a huge bar magnet passing through Earths axis, as illustrated in Figure 24.10. This is a good representation of Earth as a magnet. Like a bar magnet, Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field. 	earths magnetic field	5.a
Imagine a huge bar magnet passing through Earths axis, as illustrated in Figure 24.10. This is a good representation of Earth as a magnet. Like a bar magnet, Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field. 	switching of earths north and south magnetic poles	6.e
Although a compass always points north, it doesnt point to Earths geographic north pole, which is located at 90 north latitude (see Figure 24.11). Instead, it points to Earths magnetic north pole, which is located at about 80 north latitude. Earths magnetic south pole is also located several degrees of latitude away from the geographic south pole. A compass pointer has north and south poles, and its north pole points to Earths magnetic north pole. Why does this happen if opposite poles attract? Why doesnt the compass needle point south instead? The answer may surprise you. Earths magnetic north pole is actually the south pole of magnet Earth! Its called the magnetic north pole to avoid confusion. Because its close to the geographic north pole, it would be confusing to call it the magnetic south pole. 	navigation device that always points north	7.f
Mixtures have different properties depending on the size of their particles. Three types of mixtures based on particle size are described below. Figure 3.13 shows examples of each type. You can watch videos about the three types of mixtures at these links: MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  A solution is a homogeneous mixture with tiny particles. An example is salt water. The particles of a solution are too small to reflect light. As a result, you cannot see them. Thats why salt water looks the same as pure water. The particles of solutions are also too small to settle or be filtered out of the mixture. A suspension is a heterogeneous mixture with large particles. An example is muddy water. The particles of a suspension are big enough to reflect light, so you can see them. They are also big enough to settle or be filtered out. Anything that you have to shake before using, such as salad dressing, is usually a suspension. A colloid is a homogeneous mixture with medium-sized particles. Examples include homogenized milk and gelatin. The particles of a colloid are large enough to reflect light, so you can see them. But they are too small to settle or filter out of the mixture. 	homogeneous mixture in which particles are too small to be seen	1.e
There are millions of different substances in the world. Thats because elements can combine in many different ways to form new substances. In fact, most elements are found in compounds. A compound is a unique substance that forms when two or more elements combine chemically. An example is water, which forms when hydrogen and oxygen combine chemically. A compound always has the same components in the same proportions. It also has the same composition throughout. You can learn more about compounds and how they form by watching this video: MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	combination of two or more substances in any proportions	2.d
Mixtures have different properties depending on the size of their particles. Three types of mixtures based on particle size are described below. Figure 3.13 shows examples of each type. You can watch videos about the three types of mixtures at these links: MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  A solution is a homogeneous mixture with tiny particles. An example is salt water. The particles of a solution are too small to reflect light. As a result, you cannot see them. Thats why salt water looks the same as pure water. The particles of solutions are also too small to settle or be filtered out of the mixture. A suspension is a heterogeneous mixture with large particles. An example is muddy water. The particles of a suspension are big enough to reflect light, so you can see them. They are also big enough to settle or be filtered out. Anything that you have to shake before using, such as salad dressing, is usually a suspension. A colloid is a homogeneous mixture with medium-sized particles. Examples include homogenized milk and gelatin. The particles of a colloid are large enough to reflect light, so you can see them. But they are too small to settle or filter out of the mixture. 	homogeneous mixture in which particles are big enough to reflect light	3.a
Some mixtures are homogeneous. This means they have the same composition throughout. An example is salt water in the ocean. Ocean water everywhere is about 3.5 percent salt. Some mixtures are heterogeneous. This means they vary in their composition. An example is trail mix. No two samples of trail mix, even from the same package, are likely to be exactly the same. One sample might have more raisins, another might have more nuts. 	heterogeneous mixture	4.f
There are millions of different substances in the world. Thats because elements can combine in many different ways to form new substances. In fact, most elements are found in compounds. A compound is a unique substance that forms when two or more elements combine chemically. An example is water, which forms when hydrogen and oxygen combine chemically. A compound always has the same components in the same proportions. It also has the same composition throughout. You can learn more about compounds and how they form by watching this video: MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	unique substance that forms when two or more elements combine chemically	5.b
The smallest particle of a compound that still has the compounds properties is a molecule. A molecule consists of two or more atoms that are joined together. For example, a molecule of water consists of two hydrogen atoms joined to one oxygen atom (see Figure 3.10). You can learn more about molecules at this link:  Some compounds form crystals instead of molecules. A crystal is a rigid, lattice-like framework of many atoms bonded together. Table salt is an example of a compound that forms crystals (see Figure 3.11). Its crystals are made up of many sodium and chloride ions. Ions are electrically charged forms of atoms. You can actually watch crystals forming in this video:  . 	rigid latticelike framework of many ions bonded together	6.g
An element is a pure substance. It cannot be separated into any other substances. There are more than 90 different elements that occur in nature. Some are much more common than others. Hydrogen is the most common element in the universe. Oxygen is the most common element in Earths crust. Figure 3.7 shows other examples of elements. Still others are described in the video below. MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	pure substance that cannot be separated into any other substances	7.c
The smallest particle of an element that still has the elements properties is an atom. All the atoms of an element are alike, and they are different from the atoms of all other elements. For example, atoms of gold are the same whether they are found in a gold nugget or a gold ring (see Figure 3.8). All gold atoms have the same structure and properties. 	atoms of the same element are all alike	true
Each element has a unique set of properties that make it different from all other elements. As a result, elements can be identified by their properties. For example, the elements iron and nickel are both metals that are good conductors of heat and electricity. However, iron is attracted by a magnet, whereas nickel is not. How could you use this property to separate iron objects from nickel objects? 	each compound has a unique set of properties	true
The smallest particle of an element that still has the elements properties is an atom. All the atoms of an element are alike, and they are different from the atoms of all other elements. For example, atoms of gold are the same whether they are found in a gold nugget or a gold ring (see Figure 3.8). All gold atoms have the same structure and properties. 	atoms can be seen with a hand lens	false
There are millions of different substances in the world. Thats because elements can combine in many different ways to form new substances. In fact, most elements are found in compounds. A compound is a unique substance that forms when two or more elements combine chemically. An example is water, which forms when hydrogen and oxygen combine chemically. A compound always has the same components in the same proportions. It also has the same composition throughout. You can learn more about compounds and how they form by watching this video: MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	there are millions of different elements in the universe	false
The smallest particle of a compound that still has the compounds properties is a molecule. A molecule consists of two or more atoms that are joined together. For example, a molecule of water consists of two hydrogen atoms joined to one oxygen atom (see Figure 3.10). You can learn more about molecules at this link:  Some compounds form crystals instead of molecules. A crystal is a rigid, lattice-like framework of many atoms bonded together. Table salt is an example of a compound that forms crystals (see Figure 3.11). Its crystals are made up of many sodium and chloride ions. Ions are electrically charged forms of atoms. You can actually watch crystals forming in this video:  . 	a crystal consists of molecules that are bonded together	false
Each element has a unique set of properties that make it different from all other elements. As a result, elements can be identified by their properties. For example, the elements iron and nickel are both metals that are good conductors of heat and electricity. However, iron is attracted by a magnet, whereas nickel is not. How could you use this property to separate iron objects from nickel objects? 	each element has a unique set of properties	true
The smallest particle of an element that still has the elements properties is an atom. All the atoms of an element are alike, and they are different from the atoms of all other elements. For example, atoms of gold are the same whether they are found in a gold nugget or a gold ring (see Figure 3.8). All gold atoms have the same structure and properties. 	the idea of elements was first introduced by john dalton	false
There are millions of different substances in the world. Thats because elements can combine in many different ways to form new substances. In fact, most elements are found in compounds. A compound is a unique substance that forms when two or more elements combine chemically. An example is water, which forms when hydrogen and oxygen combine chemically. A compound always has the same components in the same proportions. It also has the same composition throughout. You can learn more about compounds and how they form by watching this video: MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	most elements are found in compounds	true
A compound has different properties than the substances it contains. For example, hydrogen and oxygen are gases at room temperature. But when they combine chemically, they form liquid water. Another example is table salt, or sodium chloride. It contains sodium and chlorine. Sodium is a silvery solid that reacts explosively with water, and chlorine is a poisonous gas (see Figure 3.9). But together, sodium and chlorine form a harmless, unreactive compound that you can safely sprinkle on food. 	a compound has the same properties as the substances it contains	false
The smallest particle of a compound that still has the compounds properties is a molecule. A molecule consists of two or more atoms that are joined together. For example, a molecule of water consists of two hydrogen atoms joined to one oxygen atom (see Figure 3.10). You can learn more about molecules at this link:  Some compounds form crystals instead of molecules. A crystal is a rigid, lattice-like framework of many atoms bonded together. Table salt is an example of a compound that forms crystals (see Figure 3.11). Its crystals are made up of many sodium and chloride ions. Ions are electrically charged forms of atoms. You can actually watch crystals forming in this video:  . 	a molecule consists of two or more atoms	true
The smallest particle of a compound that still has the compounds properties is a molecule. A molecule consists of two or more atoms that are joined together. For example, a molecule of water consists of two hydrogen atoms joined to one oxygen atom (see Figure 3.10). You can learn more about molecules at this link:  Some compounds form crystals instead of molecules. A crystal is a rigid, lattice-like framework of many atoms bonded together. Table salt is an example of a compound that forms crystals (see Figure 3.11). Its crystals are made up of many sodium and chloride ions. Ions are electrically charged forms of atoms. You can actually watch crystals forming in this video:  . 	table salt is an example of a compound that forms molecules	false
Not all combined substances are compounds. Some are mixtures. A mixture is a combination of two or more substances in any proportion. The substances in a mixture may be elements or compounds. The substances dont combine chemically to form a new substance, as they do in a compound. Instead, they keep their original properties and just intermix. Examples of mixtures include salt and water in the ocean and gases in the atmosphere. Other examples are pictured in Figure 3.12. 	the substances in a mixture may be elements or compounds	true
Some mixtures are homogeneous. This means they have the same composition throughout. An example is salt water in the ocean. Ocean water everywhere is about 3.5 percent salt. Some mixtures are heterogeneous. This means they vary in their composition. An example is trail mix. No two samples of trail mix, even from the same package, are likely to be exactly the same. One sample might have more raisins, another might have more nuts. 	a package of mixed seeds is a homogeneous mixture	false
The smallest particle of an element that still has the elements properties is an atom. All the atoms of an element are alike, and they are different from the atoms of all other elements. For example, atoms of gold are the same whether they are found in a gold nugget or a gold ring (see Figure 3.8). All gold atoms have the same structure and properties. 	mixtures are classified on the basis of particle size	true
The components of a mixture keep their own identity when they combine. Therefore, they usually can be easily separated again. Their different physical properties are used to separate them. For example, oil is less dense than water, so a mixture of oil and water can be separated by letting it stand until the oil floats to the top. Other ways of separating mixtures are shown in Figure 3.14 and in the videos below.  (2:30) MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  (2:41) MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	components of mixtures rarely can be separated	false
An electron is a particle outside the nucleus of an atom that has a negative electric charge. The charge of an electron is opposite but equal to the charge of a proton. Atoms have the same number of electrons as protons. As a result, the negative and positive charges "cancel out." This makes atoms electrically neutral. For example, a carbon atom has six electrons that "cancel out" its six protons. 	electrically neutral atomic particle inside the nucleus of an atom	1.d
The number of protons per atom is always the same for a given element. However, the number of neutrons may vary, and the number of electrons can change. 	atom that differs in its number of neutrons from other atoms of the same element	2.c
A neutron is a particle in the nucleus of an atom that has no electric charge. Atoms of an element often have the same number of neutrons as protons. For example, most carbon atoms have six neutrons as well as six protons. This is also shown in Figure 5.2. 	negatively charged atomic particle that moves around the nucleus of an atom	3.a
A neutron is a particle in the nucleus of an atom that has no electric charge. Atoms of an element often have the same number of neutrons as protons. For example, most carbon atoms have six neutrons as well as six protons. This is also shown in Figure 5.2. 	positively charged atomic particle inside the nucleus of an atom	4.f
The number of protons per atom is always the same for a given element. However, the number of neutrons may vary, and the number of electrons can change. 	type of particle that makes up protons and neutrons	5.g
The number of protons per atom is always the same for a given element. However, the number of neutrons may vary, and the number of electrons can change. 	charged particle that forms when atom gains or loses electrons	6. b
The number of protons per atom is always the same for a given element. However, the number of neutrons may vary, and the number of electrons can change. 	tiny region at the center of an atom that contains protons and neutrons	7. e
The number of protons per atom is always the same for a given element. However, the number of neutrons may vary, and the number of electrons can change. 	all protons are exactly the same	true
The number of protons per atom is always the same for a given element. However, the number of neutrons may vary, and the number of electrons can change. 	electrons have the same mass as protons	false
An electron is a particle outside the nucleus of an atom that has a negative electric charge. The charge of an electron is opposite but equal to the charge of a proton. Atoms have the same number of electrons as protons. As a result, the negative and positive charges "cancel out." This makes atoms electrically neutral. For example, a carbon atom has six electrons that "cancel out" its six protons. 	atoms may be positive or negative in charge	false
The number of protons per atom is always the same for a given element. However, the number of neutrons may vary, and the number of electrons can change. 	all atoms of a given element have the same number of electrons	true
Remember the quarks from the first page of this chapter? Quarks are even tinier particles of matter that make up protons and neutrons. There are three quarks in each proton and three quarks in each neutron. The charges of quarks are balanced exactly right to give a positive charge to a proton and a neutral charge to a neutron. It might seem strange that quarks are never found alone but only as components of other particles. This is because the quarks are held together by very strange particles called gluons. 	there are three quarks in each neutron	true
Figure 5.1 represents a simple model of an atom. You will learn about more complex models in later lessons, but this model is a good place to start. You can see similar, animated models of atoms at this URL: http://web.jjay.cuny 	atoms are the smallest particles of matter	false
The number of protons per atom is always the same for a given element. However, the number of neutrons may vary, and the number of electrons can change. 	an atom always has the same number of electrons as neutrons	false
The number of protons per atom is always the same for a given element. However, the number of neutrons may vary, and the number of electrons can change. 	the nucleus is at the center of the atom	true
A neutron is a particle in the nucleus of an atom that has no electric charge. Atoms of an element often have the same number of neutrons as protons. For example, most carbon atoms have six neutrons as well as six protons. This is also shown in Figure 5.2. 	atoms have no electric charge	true
The number of protons per atom is always the same for a given element. However, the number of neutrons may vary, and the number of electrons can change. 	the strong force keeps electrons moving around the nucleus	false
The number of protons per atom is always the same for a given element. However, the number of neutrons may vary, and the number of electrons can change. 	electrons have almost no mass	true
The number of protons per atom is always the same for a given element. However, the number of neutrons may vary, and the number of electrons can change. 	the mass of an atom equals the sum of its protons and neutrons	true
For most other elements, isotopes are named for their mass number. For example, carbon atoms with the usual 6 neutrons have a mass number of 12 (6 protons + 6 neutrons = 12), so they are called carbon-12. Carbon atoms with 7 neutrons have an atomic mass of 13 (6 protons + 7 neutrons = 13). These atoms are the isotope called carbon-13. Some carbon atoms have 8 neutrons. What is the name of this isotope of carbon? You can learn more about this isotope at the URL below. It is used by scientists to estimate the ages of rocks and fossils. 	for most elements isotopes are named for their atomic number	false
Remember the quarks from the first page of this chapter? Quarks are even tinier particles of matter that make up protons and neutrons. There are three quarks in each proton and three quarks in each neutron. The charges of quarks are balanced exactly right to give a positive charge to a proton and a neutral charge to a neutron. It might seem strange that quarks are never found alone but only as components of other particles. This is because the quarks are held together by very strange particles called gluons. 	each proton consists of three quarks	true
Remember the quarks from the first page of this chapter? Quarks are even tinier particles of matter that make up protons and neutrons. There are three quarks in each proton and three quarks in each neutron. The charges of quarks are balanced exactly right to give a positive charge to a proton and a neutral charge to a neutron. It might seem strange that quarks are never found alone but only as components of other particles. This is because the quarks are held together by very strange particles called gluons. 	quarks are held together by gluons	true
The next major advance in the history of the atom was the discovery of electrons. These were the first subatomic particles to be identified. They were discovered in 1897 by a British physicist named J. J. Thomson. You can learn more about Thomson and his discovery at this online exhibit:  . 	scientist who discovered electrons	1.d
The history of the atom begins around 450 B.C. with a Greek philosopher named Democritus (see Figure 5.7). Democritus wondered what would happen if you cut a piece of matter, such as an apple, into smaller and smaller pieces. He thought that a point would be reached where matter could not be cut into still smaller pieces. He called these "uncuttable" pieces atomos. This is where the modern term atom comes from. Democritus was an important philosopher. However, he was less influential than the Greek philosopher Aristotle, who lived about 100 years after Democritus. Aristotle rejected Democrituss idea of atoms. In fact, Aristotle thought 	philosopher who thought the idea of the atom was ridiculous	2.b
Thomson knew that atoms are neutral in electric charge. So how could atoms contain negative particles? Thomson thought that the rest of the atom must be positive to cancel out the negative charge. He said that an atom is like a plum pudding, which has plums scattered through it. Thats why Thomsons model of the atom is called the plum pudding model. You can see it in Figure 5.11. It shows the atom as a sphere of positive charge (the pudding) with negative electrons (the plums) scattered through it. 	thomsons atomic model	3.f
In 1899, Rutherford discovered that some elements give off positively charged particles. He named them alpha particles (a). In 1911, he used alpha particles to study atoms. He aimed a beam of alpha particles at a very thin sheet of gold foil. Outside the foil, he placed a screen of material that glowed when alpha particles struck it. If Thomsons plum pudding model were correct, the alpha particles should be deflected a little as they passed through the foil. Why? The positive "pudding" part of gold atoms would slightly repel the positive alpha particles. This would cause the alpha particles to change course. But Rutherford got a surprise. Most of the alpha particles passed straight through the foil as though they were moving through empty space. Even more surprising, a few of the alpha particles bounced back from the foil as though they had struck a wall. This is called back scattering. It happened only in very small areas at the centers of the gold atoms. 	thomson aimed a beam of alpha particles at gold foil	false
The history of the atom begins around 450 B.C. with a Greek philosopher named Democritus (see Figure 5.7). Democritus wondered what would happen if you cut a piece of matter, such as an apple, into smaller and smaller pieces. He thought that a point would be reached where matter could not be cut into still smaller pieces. He called these "uncuttable" pieces atomos. This is where the modern term atom comes from. Democritus was an important philosopher. However, he was less influential than the Greek philosopher Aristotle, who lived about 100 years after Democritus. Aristotle rejected Democrituss idea of atoms. In fact, Aristotle thought 	philosopher who introduced the idea of the atom	4.a
Thomson knew that atoms are neutral in electric charge. So how could atoms contain negative particles? Thomson thought that the rest of the atom must be positive to cancel out the negative charge. He said that an atom is like a plum pudding, which has plums scattered through it. Thats why Thomsons model of the atom is called the plum pudding model. You can see it in Figure 5.11. It shows the atom as a sphere of positive charge (the pudding) with negative electrons (the plums) scattered through it. 	the plums in the plum pudding model represent protons	false
Rutherfords discoveries meant that Thomsons plum pudding model was incorrect. Positive charge is not spread out everywhere in an atom. It is all concentrated in the tiny nucleus. The rest of the atom is empty space, except for the electrons moving randomly through it. In Rutherfords model, electrons move around the nucleus in random orbits. He compared them to planets orbiting a star. Thats why Rutherfords model is called the planetary model. You can see it in Figure 5.13. 	rutherfords atomic model	5.g
The atomic theory Dalton developed consists of three ideas: All substances are made of atoms. Atoms are the smallest particles of matter. They cannot be divided into smaller particles. They also cannot be created or destroyed. All atoms of the same element are alike and have the same mass. Atoms of different elements are different and have different masses. Atoms join together to form compounds. A given compound always consists of the same kinds of atoms in the same ratio. Daltons theory was soon widely accepted. Most of it is still accepted today. The only part that is no longer accepted is his idea that atoms are the smallest particles. Scientists now know that atoms consist of even smaller particles. 	scientist who developed atomic theory	6.c
Rutherfords discoveries meant that Thomsons plum pudding model was incorrect. Positive charge is not spread out everywhere in an atom. It is all concentrated in the tiny nucleus. The rest of the atom is empty space, except for the electrons moving randomly through it. In Rutherfords model, electrons move around the nucleus in random orbits. He compared them to planets orbiting a star. Thats why Rutherfords model is called the planetary model. You can see it in Figure 5.13. 	the planets in the planetary model represent electrons	true
A physicist from New Zealand named Ernest Rutherford made the next major discovery about atoms. He discovered the nucleus. You can watch a video about Rutherford and his discovery at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	scientist who discovered the nucleus	7.e
The next major advance in the history of the atom was the discovery of electrons. These were the first subatomic particles to be identified. They were discovered in 1897 by a British physicist named J. J. Thomson. You can learn more about Thomson and his discovery at this online exhibit:  . 	the first subatomic particle to be discovered was the proton	false
The atomic theory Dalton developed consists of three ideas: All substances are made of atoms. Atoms are the smallest particles of matter. They cannot be divided into smaller particles. They also cannot be created or destroyed. All atoms of the same element are alike and have the same mass. Atoms of different elements are different and have different masses. Atoms join together to form compounds. A given compound always consists of the same kinds of atoms in the same ratio. Daltons theory was soon widely accepted. Most of it is still accepted today. The only part that is no longer accepted is his idea that atoms are the smallest particles. Scientists now know that atoms consist of even smaller particles. 	dalton thought that all substances are made of atoms	true
The history of the atom begins around 450 B.C. with a Greek philosopher named Democritus (see Figure 5.7). Democritus wondered what would happen if you cut a piece of matter, such as an apple, into smaller and smaller pieces. He thought that a point would be reached where matter could not be cut into still smaller pieces. He called these "uncuttable" pieces atomos. This is where the modern term atom comes from. Democritus was an important philosopher. However, he was less influential than the Greek philosopher Aristotle, who lived about 100 years after Democritus. Aristotle rejected Democrituss idea of atoms. In fact, Aristotle thought 	aristotle rejected democrituss idea of the atom	true
The atomic theory Dalton developed consists of three ideas: All substances are made of atoms. Atoms are the smallest particles of matter. They cannot be divided into smaller particles. They also cannot be created or destroyed. All atoms of the same element are alike and have the same mass. Atoms of different elements are different and have different masses. Atoms join together to form compounds. A given compound always consists of the same kinds of atoms in the same ratio. Daltons theory was soon widely accepted. Most of it is still accepted today. The only part that is no longer accepted is his idea that atoms are the smallest particles. Scientists now know that atoms consist of even smaller particles. 	dalton thought that atoms could be created or destroyed	false
The atomic theory Dalton developed consists of three ideas: All substances are made of atoms. Atoms are the smallest particles of matter. They cannot be divided into smaller particles. They also cannot be created or destroyed. All atoms of the same element are alike and have the same mass. Atoms of different elements are different and have different masses. Atoms join together to form compounds. A given compound always consists of the same kinds of atoms in the same ratio. Daltons theory was soon widely accepted. Most of it is still accepted today. The only part that is no longer accepted is his idea that atoms are the smallest particles. Scientists now know that atoms consist of even smaller particles. 	daltons atomic theory was later completely rejected	false
A physicist from New Zealand named Ernest Rutherford made the next major discovery about atoms. He discovered the nucleus. You can watch a video about Rutherford and his discovery at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	ernest rutherford discovered neutrons	false
Thomson knew that atoms are neutral in electric charge. So how could atoms contain negative particles? Thomson thought that the rest of the atom must be positive to cancel out the negative charge. He said that an atom is like a plum pudding, which has plums scattered through it. Thats why Thomsons model of the atom is called the plum pudding model. You can see it in Figure 5.11. It shows the atom as a sphere of positive charge (the pudding) with negative electrons (the plums) scattered through it. 	thomson showed that electric charge is carried by particles of matter	true
Thomson knew that atoms are neutral in electric charge. So how could atoms contain negative particles? Thomson thought that the rest of the atom must be positive to cancel out the negative charge. He said that an atom is like a plum pudding, which has plums scattered through it. Thats why Thomsons model of the atom is called the plum pudding model. You can see it in Figure 5.11. It shows the atom as a sphere of positive charge (the pudding) with negative electrons (the plums) scattered through it. 	the pudding in the plum pudding model represents positive charge	true
Dalton incorrectly thought that atoms are tiny solid particles of matter. He used solid wooden balls to model them. The sketch in the Figure 5.9 shows how Daltons model atoms looked. He made holes in the balls so they could be joined together with hooks. In this way, the balls could be used to model compounds. When later scientists discovered subatomic particles (particles smaller than the atom itself), they realized that Daltons models were too simple. They didnt show that atoms consist of even smaller particles. Models including these smaller particles were later developed. 	democritus represented atoms with solid wooden balls	false
In 1899, Rutherford discovered that some elements give off positively charged particles. He named them alpha particles (a). In 1911, he used alpha particles to study atoms. He aimed a beam of alpha particles at a very thin sheet of gold foil. Outside the foil, he placed a screen of material that glowed when alpha particles struck it. If Thomsons plum pudding model were correct, the alpha particles should be deflected a little as they passed through the foil. Why? The positive "pudding" part of gold atoms would slightly repel the positive alpha particles. This would cause the alpha particles to change course. But Rutherford got a surprise. Most of the alpha particles passed straight through the foil as though they were moving through empty space. Even more surprising, a few of the alpha particles bounced back from the foil as though they had struck a wall. This is called back scattering. It happened only in very small areas at the centers of the gold atoms. 	in the gold foil experiments most of the alpha particles were deflected backward from the gold foil	false
A physicist from New Zealand named Ernest Rutherford made the next major discovery about atoms. He discovered the nucleus. You can watch a video about Rutherford and his discovery at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	dalton was the first scientist to observe atoms with a microscope	false
Thomson was interested in electricity. He did experiments in which he passed an electric current through a vacuum tube. The experiments are described in Figure 5.10. Thomsons experiments showed that an electric current consists of flowing, negatively charged particles. Why was this discovery important? Many scientists of Thomsons time thought that electric current consists of rays, like rays of light, and that it is positive rather than negative. Thomsons experiments also showed that the negative particles are all alike and smaller than atoms. Thomson concluded that the negative particles couldnt be fundamental units of matter because they are all alike. Instead, they must be parts of atoms. The negative particles were later named electrons. 	electrons flow through a vacuum tube from the negative end to the positive end	true
Bohrs research focused on electrons. In 1913, he discovered evidence that the orbits of electrons are located at fixed distances from the nucleus. Remember, Rutherford thought that electrons orbit the nucleus at random. Figure 5.14 shows Bohrs model of the atom. 	the focus of bohrs research was the nucleus	false
Bohrs research focused on electrons. In 1913, he discovered evidence that the orbits of electrons are located at fixed distances from the nucleus. Remember, Rutherford thought that electrons orbit the nucleus at random. Figure 5.14 shows Bohrs model of the atom. 	bohr rejected modern atomic theory	false
Some regions of the electron cloud are denser than others. The denser regions are areas where electrons are most likely to be. These regions are called orbitals. Each orbital has a maximum of just two electrons. Different energy levels in the cloud have different numbers of orbitals. Therefore, different energy levels have different maximum numbers of electrons. Table 5.1 lists the number of orbitals and electrons for the first four energy levels. Energy levels farther from the nucleus have more orbitals. Therefore, these levels can hold more electrons. Energy Level Number of Orbitals 1 2 3 4 1 4 9 16 Max. No. of Electrons (@ 2 per orbital) 2 8 18 32 Figure 5.18 shows the arrangement of electrons in an atom of magnesium as an example. The most stable arrange- ment of electrons occurs when electrons fill the orbitals at the lowest energy levels first before more are added at higher levels. You can learn more about orbitals and their electrons at the URL below: 	there is a maximum of two energy levels in an atom	false
Today, these ideas about electrons are represented by the electron cloud model. The electron cloud is an area around the nucleus where electrons are likely to be. Figure 5.17 shows an electron cloud model for a helium atom. 	electrons fall toward the nucleus because they behave like waves	false
Bohrs idea of energy levels is still useful today. It helps explain how matter behaves. For example, when chemicals in fireworks explode, their atoms absorb energy. Some of their electrons jump to a higher energy level. When the electrons move back to their original energy level, they give off the energy as light. Different chemicals have different arrangements of electrons, so they give off light of different colors. This explains the blue- and purple- colored fireworks in Figure 5.16. 	energy levels are located between the orbitals of atoms	false
Bohrs idea of energy levels is still useful today. It helps explain how matter behaves. For example, when chemicals in fireworks explode, their atoms absorb energy. Some of their electrons jump to a higher energy level. When the electrons move back to their original energy level, they give off the energy as light. Different chemicals have different arrangements of electrons, so they give off light of different colors. This explains the blue- and purple- colored fireworks in Figure 5.16. 	energy level 1 has the most energy	false
Bohrs idea of energy levels is still useful today. It helps explain how matter behaves. For example, when chemicals in fireworks explode, their atoms absorb energy. Some of their electrons jump to a higher energy level. When the electrons move back to their original energy level, they give off the energy as light. Different chemicals have different arrangements of electrons, so they give off light of different colors. This explains the blue- and purple- colored fireworks in Figure 5.16. 	electrons can move from one energy level to another	true
Today, these ideas about electrons are represented by the electron cloud model. The electron cloud is an area around the nucleus where electrons are likely to be. Figure 5.17 shows an electron cloud model for a helium atom. 	scientists can now determine the exact location of any given electron	false
Today, these ideas about electrons are represented by the electron cloud model. The electron cloud is an area around the nucleus where electrons are likely to be. Figure 5.17 shows an electron cloud model for a helium atom. 	electrons are attracted to the nucleus because of the strong force	false
Today, these ideas about electrons are represented by the electron cloud model. The electron cloud is an area around the nucleus where electrons are likely to be. Figure 5.17 shows an electron cloud model for a helium atom. 	some regions of the electron cloud are denser than others	true
Some regions of the electron cloud are denser than others. The denser regions are areas where electrons are most likely to be. These regions are called orbitals. Each orbital has a maximum of just two electrons. Different energy levels in the cloud have different numbers of orbitals. Therefore, different energy levels have different maximum numbers of electrons. Table 5.1 lists the number of orbitals and electrons for the first four energy levels. Energy levels farther from the nucleus have more orbitals. Therefore, these levels can hold more electrons. Energy Level Number of Orbitals 1 2 3 4 1 4 9 16 Max. No. of Electrons (@ 2 per orbital) 2 8 18 32 Figure 5.18 shows the arrangement of electrons in an atom of magnesium as an example. The most stable arrange- ment of electrons occurs when electrons fill the orbitals at the lowest energy levels first before more are added at higher levels. You can learn more about orbitals and their electrons at the URL below: 	there is a maximum of two orbitals per energy level	false
Bohrs idea of energy levels is still useful today. It helps explain how matter behaves. For example, when chemicals in fireworks explode, their atoms absorb energy. Some of their electrons jump to a higher energy level. When the electrons move back to their original energy level, they give off the energy as light. Different chemicals have different arrangements of electrons, so they give off light of different colors. This explains the blue- and purple- colored fireworks in Figure 5.16. 	fireworks give off light when their electrons split in two	false
In the 1920s, physicists discovered that electrons do not travel in fixed paths. In fact, they found that electrons only have a certain chance of being in any particular place. They could only describe where electrons are with mathematical formulas. Thats because electrons have wave-like properties as well as properties of particles of matter. It is the "wave nature" of electrons that lets them exist only at certain distances from the nucleus. The negative electrons are attracted to the positive nucleus. However, because the electrons behave like waves, they bend around the nucleus instead of falling toward it. Electrons exist only where the wave is stable. These are the orbitals. They do not exist where the wave is not stable. These are the places between orbitals. 	since the 1920s physicists have known that electrons travel in fixed paths	false
In the 1920s, physicists discovered that electrons do not travel in fixed paths. In fact, they found that electrons only have a certain chance of being in any particular place. They could only describe where electrons are with mathematical formulas. Thats because electrons have wave-like properties as well as properties of particles of matter. It is the "wave nature" of electrons that lets them exist only at certain distances from the nucleus. The negative electrons are attracted to the positive nucleus. However, because the electrons behave like waves, they bend around the nucleus instead of falling toward it. Electrons exist only where the wave is stable. These are the orbitals. They do not exist where the wave is not stable. These are the places between orbitals. 	wavelike particles in the atom exist only where the wave is stable	true
Bohrs idea of energy levels is still useful today. It helps explain how matter behaves. For example, when chemicals in fireworks explode, their atoms absorb energy. Some of their electrons jump to a higher energy level. When the electrons move back to their original energy level, they give off the energy as light. Different chemicals have different arrangements of electrons, so they give off light of different colors. This explains the blue- and purple- colored fireworks in Figure 5.16. 	all energy levels have the same maximum number of electrons	false
Some regions of the electron cloud are denser than others. The denser regions are areas where electrons are most likely to be. These regions are called orbitals. Each orbital has a maximum of just two electrons. Different energy levels in the cloud have different numbers of orbitals. Therefore, different energy levels have different maximum numbers of electrons. Table 5.1 lists the number of orbitals and electrons for the first four energy levels. Energy levels farther from the nucleus have more orbitals. Therefore, these levels can hold more electrons. Energy Level Number of Orbitals 1 2 3 4 1 4 9 16 Max. No. of Electrons (@ 2 per orbital) 2 8 18 32 Figure 5.18 shows the arrangement of electrons in an atom of magnesium as an example. The most stable arrange- ment of electrons occurs when electrons fill the orbitals at the lowest energy levels first before more are added at higher levels. You can learn more about orbitals and their electrons at the URL below: 	number of orbitals in the first energy level	1.g
Today, these ideas about electrons are represented by the electron cloud model. The electron cloud is an area around the nucleus where electrons are likely to be. Figure 5.17 shows an electron cloud model for a helium atom. 	area surrounding the nucleus of an atom where electrons are likely to be	2.a
Bohrs research focused on electrons. In 1913, he discovered evidence that the orbits of electrons are located at fixed distances from the nucleus. Remember, Rutherford thought that electrons orbit the nucleus at random. Figure 5.14 shows Bohrs model of the atom. 	scientist who thought that electrons orbit the nucleus like planets orbit the sun	3.c
Today, these ideas about electrons are represented by the electron cloud model. The electron cloud is an area around the nucleus where electrons are likely to be. Figure 5.17 shows an electron cloud model for a helium atom. 	maximum number of electrons per orbital	4.f
Bohrs research focused on electrons. In 1913, he discovered evidence that the orbits of electrons are located at fixed distances from the nucleus. Remember, Rutherford thought that electrons orbit the nucleus at random. Figure 5.14 shows Bohrs model of the atom. 	area located at a fixed distance from the nucleus of an atom where electrons can orbit the nucleus	5.b
Today, these ideas about electrons are represented by the electron cloud model. The electron cloud is an area around the nucleus where electrons are likely to be. Figure 5.17 shows an electron cloud model for a helium atom. 	wavelike particles that move around the nucleus of an atom	6.e
Bohrs idea of energy levels is still useful today. It helps explain how matter behaves. For example, when chemicals in fireworks explode, their atoms absorb energy. Some of their electrons jump to a higher energy level. When the electrons move back to their original energy level, they give off the energy as light. Different chemicals have different arrangements of electrons, so they give off light of different colors. This explains the blue- and purple- colored fireworks in Figure 5.16. 	scientist who discovered energy levels	7.d
In the modern periodic table, elements are organized by atomic number. The atomic number is the number of protons in an atom of an element. This number is unique for each element, so it seems like an obvious way to organize the elements. (Mendeleev used atomic mass instead of atomic number because protons had not yet been discovered when he made his table.) In the modern table, atomic number increases from left to right across each period. It also increases from top to bottom within each group. How is this like Mendeleevs table? 	number of protons in an atom	1.c
A periodic table is still used today to classify the elements. Figure 6.3 shows the modern periodic table. You can see an interactive version at this URL:  . 	row of the periodic table	2.b
A periodic table is still used today to classify the elements. Figure 6.3 shows the modern periodic table. You can see an interactive version at this URL:  . 	table based on the atomic number of elements	3.g
A periodic table is still used today to classify the elements. Figure 6.3 shows the modern periodic table. You can see an interactive version at this URL:  . 	mendeleev left spaces in his periodic table for unknown elements	true
A periodic table is still used today to classify the elements. Figure 6.3 shows the modern periodic table. You can see an interactive version at this URL:  . 	how an element is represented in the periodic table	4.e
A periodic table is still used today to classify the elements. Figure 6.3 shows the modern periodic table. You can see an interactive version at this URL:  . 	the modern periodic table is the same as mendeleevs table but with more elements	false
In the modern periodic table, elements are organized by atomic number. The atomic number is the number of protons in an atom of an element. This number is unique for each element, so it seems like an obvious way to organize the elements. (Mendeleev used atomic mass instead of atomic number because protons had not yet been discovered when he made his table.) In the modern table, atomic number increases from left to right across each period. It also increases from top to bottom within each group. How is this like Mendeleevs table? 	table based on the atomic mass of elements	5.f
A periodic table is still used today to classify the elements. Figure 6.3 shows the modern periodic table. You can see an interactive version at this URL:  . 	column of the periodic table	6. a
A periodic table is still used today to classify the elements. Figure 6.3 shows the modern periodic table. You can see an interactive version at this URL:  . 	the modern periodic table has more than 100 elements	true
In the modern periodic table, elements are organized by atomic number. The atomic number is the number of protons in an atom of an element. This number is unique for each element, so it seems like an obvious way to organize the elements. (Mendeleev used atomic mass instead of atomic number because protons had not yet been discovered when he made his table.) In the modern table, atomic number increases from left to right across each period. It also increases from top to bottom within each group. How is this like Mendeleevs table? 	amount of matter in an atom	7. d
A periodic table is still used today to classify the elements. Figure 6.3 shows the modern periodic table. You can see an interactive version at this URL:  . 	elements called actinides are in period 7 of the periodic table	true
A periodic table is still used today to classify the elements. Figure 6.3 shows the modern periodic table. You can see an interactive version at this URL:  . 	elements in the same period of the periodic table have similar properties	false
A periodic table is still used today to classify the elements. Figure 6.3 shows the modern periodic table. You can see an interactive version at this URL:  . 	mendeleev developed his periodic table in the 1860s	true
Columns of the modern table are called groups, as they are in Mendeleevs table. However, the modern table has many more groups  18 to be exact. Elements in the same group have similar properties. For example, all elements in group 18 are colorless, odorless gases. You can read about the different groups of elements in this chapters lesson on "Groups of Elements." 	mendeleev named the columns of his table periods	false
A periodic table is still used today to classify the elements. Figure 6.3 shows the modern periodic table. You can see an interactive version at this URL:  . 	elements within a group of the periodic table are identical to each other	false
Columns of the modern table are called groups, as they are in Mendeleevs table. However, the modern table has many more groups  18 to be exact. Elements in the same group have similar properties. For example, all elements in group 18 are colorless, odorless gases. You can read about the different groups of elements in this chapters lesson on "Groups of Elements." 	in mendeleevs table each period contains 18 elements	false
Columns of the modern table are called groups, as they are in Mendeleevs table. However, the modern table has many more groups  18 to be exact. Elements in the same group have similar properties. For example, all elements in group 18 are colorless, odorless gases. You can read about the different groups of elements in this chapters lesson on "Groups of Elements." 	mendeleevs used his table to predict unknown elements	true
In the modern periodic table, elements are organized by atomic number. The atomic number is the number of protons in an atom of an element. This number is unique for each element, so it seems like an obvious way to organize the elements. (Mendeleev used atomic mass instead of atomic number because protons had not yet been discovered when he made his table.) In the modern table, atomic number increases from left to right across each period. It also increases from top to bottom within each group. How is this like Mendeleevs table? 	the elements mendeleev predicted were never discovered	false
A periodic table is still used today to classify the elements. Figure 6.3 shows the modern periodic table. You can see an interactive version at this URL:  . 	lanthanide elements are placed in period 2 of the modern periodic table	false
Besides atomic number, the periodic table includes each elements chemical symbol and class. Some tables include other information as well. The chemical symbol consists of one or two letters that come from the chemicals name in English or another language. The first letter is always written in upper case. The second letter, if there is one, is always written in lower case. For example, the symbol for lead is Pb. It comes from the Latin word plumbum, which means "lead." Find lead in Figure 6.3. What is its atomic number? You can access videos about lead and other elements in the modern periodic table at this URL:  . The classes of elements are metals, metalloids, and nonmetals. They are color-coded in the table. Blue stands for metals, orange for metalloids, and green for nonmetals. You can read about each of these three classes of elements later in the chapter, in the lesson "Classes of Elements." 	the chemical symbol for lead is pb	true
A periodic table is still used today to classify the elements. Figure 6.3 shows the modern periodic table. You can see an interactive version at this URL:  . 	most elements in the modern periodic table are metalloids	false
A periodic table is still used today to classify the elements. Figure 6.3 shows the modern periodic table. You can see an interactive version at this URL:  . 	krypton is a gaseous metal in group 18 of the periodic table	true
Metalloids are elements that fall between metals and nonmetals in the periodic table. Just seven elements are metalloids, so they are the smallest class of elements. In Figure 6.3, they are color-coded orange. Examples of metalloids include boron (B), silicon (Si), and germanium (Ge). Metalloids have some properties of metals and some properties of nonmetals. For example, many metalloids can conduct electricity but only at certain temperatures. These metalloids are called semiconductors. Silicon is an example. It is used in computer chips. It is also the most common metalloid on Earth. It is shiny like a metal but brittle like a nonmetal. You see a sample of silicon in Figure 6.7. The figure also shows other examples of metalloids. You can learn more about the properties of metalloids at this URL: http://library.thinkquest.org/3659/p 	class of elements that do not conduct electricity	1.c
Nonmetals are elements that do not conduct electricity. They are the second largest class of elements. Find the nonmetals in Figure 6.3. They are all the elements on the right side of the table that are color-coded green. Examples of nonmetals include helium (He), carbon (C), and oxygen (O). Nonmetals generally have properties that are the opposite of those of metals. They also tend to vary more in their properties than metals do. For example, nonmetals have relatively low boiling points, so many of them are gases at room temperature. But several nonmetals are solids, including carbon and phosphorus (P). One nonmetal, bromine (Br), is a liquid at room temperature. Generally, nonmetals are also poor conductors of heat. In fact, they may be used for insulation. For example, the down filling in a down jacket is mostly air, which consists mainly of nitrogen (N) and oxygen (O). These nonmetal gases are poor conductors of heat, so they keep body heat in and cold air out. Solid nonmetals are dull rather than shiny. They are also brittle rather than ductile or malleable. You can see examples of solid nonmetals in Figure 6.6. You can learn more about specific nonmetals with the interactive table at this URL: http://library.thinkquest.org/36 	word that describes most solid nonmetals	2.g
Metalloids are elements that fall between metals and nonmetals in the periodic table. Just seven elements are metalloids, so they are the smallest class of elements. In Figure 6.3, they are color-coded orange. Examples of metalloids include boron (B), silicon (Si), and germanium (Ge). Metalloids have some properties of metals and some properties of nonmetals. For example, many metalloids can conduct electricity but only at certain temperatures. These metalloids are called semiconductors. Silicon is an example. It is used in computer chips. It is also the most common metalloid on Earth. It is shiny like a metal but brittle like a nonmetal. You see a sample of silicon in Figure 6.7. The figure also shows other examples of metalloids. You can learn more about the properties of metalloids at this URL: http://library.thinkquest.org/3659/p 	smallest class of elements	3.b
Metals are elements that are good conductors of electricity. They are the largest of the three classes of elements. In fact, most elements are metals. Look back at the modern periodic table (Figure 6.3) in this chapters lesson "How Elements Are Organized." Find the metals in the table. They are all the elements that are color-coded blue. Examples include sodium (Na), silver (Ag), and zinc (Zn). Metals have relatively high melting points, so almost all are solids at room temperature. The only exception is mercury (Hg), which is a liquid. Most metals are also good conductors of heat. Thats why they are used for cooking pots and stovetops. Metals have other characteristic properties as well. Most are shiny, ductile, and malleable. These properties are illustrated in Figure 6.5. You can dig deeper into the properties of metals at this URL: 	all metalloids are solids are room temperature	true
Nonmetals are elements that do not conduct electricity. They are the second largest class of elements. Find the nonmetals in Figure 6.3. They are all the elements on the right side of the table that are color-coded green. Examples of nonmetals include helium (He), carbon (C), and oxygen (O). Nonmetals generally have properties that are the opposite of those of metals. They also tend to vary more in their properties than metals do. For example, nonmetals have relatively low boiling points, so many of them are gases at room temperature. But several nonmetals are solids, including carbon and phosphorus (P). One nonmetal, bromine (Br), is a liquid at room temperature. Generally, nonmetals are also poor conductors of heat. In fact, they may be used for insulation. For example, the down filling in a down jacket is mostly air, which consists mainly of nitrogen (N) and oxygen (O). These nonmetal gases are poor conductors of heat, so they keep body heat in and cold air out. Solid nonmetals are dull rather than shiny. They are also brittle rather than ductile or malleable. You can see examples of solid nonmetals in Figure 6.6. You can learn more about specific nonmetals with the interactive table at this URL: http://library.thinkquest.org/36 	only nonmetal that is a liquid at room temperature	4.f
The increase in electrons across the periodic table explains why elements go from metals to metalloids and then to nonmetals from left to right across the table. Look at period 2 in Figure 6.8 as an example. Lithium (Li) is a metal, boron (B) a metalloid, and fluorine (F) and neon (Ne) are nonmetals. The inner energy level is full for all four elements. This level has just one orbital and can hold a maximum of two electrons. The outer energy level is a different story. This level has four orbitals and can hold a maximum of eight electrons. Lithium has just one electron in this level, boron has three, fluorine has seven, and neon has eight. 	nonmetals are the second largest class of elements	true
The increase in electrons across the periodic table explains why elements go from metals to metalloids and then to nonmetals from left to right across the table. Look at period 2 in Figure 6.8 as an example. Lithium (Li) is a metal, boron (B) a metalloid, and fluorine (F) and neon (Ne) are nonmetals. The inner energy level is full for all four elements. This level has just one orbital and can hold a maximum of two electrons. The outer energy level is a different story. This level has four orbitals and can hold a maximum of eight electrons. Lithium has just one electron in this level, boron has three, fluorine has seven, and neon has eight. 	word that describes most metals	5.e
Metals are elements that are good conductors of electricity. They are the largest of the three classes of elements. In fact, most elements are metals. Look back at the modern periodic table (Figure 6.3) in this chapters lesson "How Elements Are Organized." Find the metals in the table. They are all the elements that are color-coded blue. Examples include sodium (Na), silver (Ag), and zinc (Zn). Metals have relatively high melting points, so almost all are solids at room temperature. The only exception is mercury (Hg), which is a liquid. Most metals are also good conductors of heat. Thats why they are used for cooking pots and stovetops. Metals have other characteristic properties as well. Most are shiny, ductile, and malleable. These properties are illustrated in Figure 6.5. You can dig deeper into the properties of metals at this URL: 	only metal that is a liquid at room temperature	6.d
The increase in electrons across the periodic table explains why elements go from metals to metalloids and then to nonmetals from left to right across the table. Look at period 2 in Figure 6.8 as an example. Lithium (Li) is a metal, boron (B) a metalloid, and fluorine (F) and neon (Ne) are nonmetals. The inner energy level is full for all four elements. This level has just one orbital and can hold a maximum of two electrons. The outer energy level is a different story. This level has four orbitals and can hold a maximum of eight electrons. Lithium has just one electron in this level, boron has three, fluorine has seven, and neon has eight. 	elements with eight valence electron are unreactive	true
Metalloids are elements that fall between metals and nonmetals in the periodic table. Just seven elements are metalloids, so they are the smallest class of elements. In Figure 6.3, they are color-coded orange. Examples of metalloids include boron (B), silicon (Si), and germanium (Ge). Metalloids have some properties of metals and some properties of nonmetals. For example, many metalloids can conduct electricity but only at certain temperatures. These metalloids are called semiconductors. Silicon is an example. It is used in computer chips. It is also the most common metalloid on Earth. It is shiny like a metal but brittle like a nonmetal. You see a sample of silicon in Figure 6.7. The figure also shows other examples of metalloids. You can learn more about the properties of metalloids at this URL: http://library.thinkquest.org/3659/p 	class of elements that conduct electricity	7.a
The increase in electrons across the periodic table explains why elements go from metals to metalloids and then to nonmetals from left to right across the table. Look at period 2 in Figure 6.8 as an example. Lithium (Li) is a metal, boron (B) a metalloid, and fluorine (F) and neon (Ne) are nonmetals. The inner energy level is full for all four elements. This level has just one orbital and can hold a maximum of two electrons. The outer energy level is a different story. This level has four orbitals and can hold a maximum of eight electrons. Lithium has just one electron in this level, boron has three, fluorine has seven, and neon has eight. 	fluorine is an example of a metalloid	false
From left to right across the periodic table, each element has one more proton than the element to its left. Because atoms are always electrically neutral, for each added proton, one electron is also added. Electrons are added first to the lowest energy level possible until that level is full. Only then are electrons added to the next higher energy level. 	nonmetals tend to give up electrons	false
Metals are elements that are good conductors of electricity. They are the largest of the three classes of elements. In fact, most elements are metals. Look back at the modern periodic table (Figure 6.3) in this chapters lesson "How Elements Are Organized." Find the metals in the table. They are all the elements that are color-coded blue. Examples include sodium (Na), silver (Ag), and zinc (Zn). Metals have relatively high melting points, so almost all are solids at room temperature. The only exception is mercury (Hg), which is a liquid. Most metals are also good conductors of heat. Thats why they are used for cooking pots and stovetops. Metals have other characteristic properties as well. Most are shiny, ductile, and malleable. These properties are illustrated in Figure 6.5. You can dig deeper into the properties of metals at this URL: 	metals have relatively high melting points	true
The increase in electrons across the periodic table explains why elements go from metals to metalloids and then to nonmetals from left to right across the table. Look at period 2 in Figure 6.8 as an example. Lithium (Li) is a metal, boron (B) a metalloid, and fluorine (F) and neon (Ne) are nonmetals. The inner energy level is full for all four elements. This level has just one orbital and can hold a maximum of two electrons. The outer energy level is a different story. This level has four orbitals and can hold a maximum of eight electrons. Lithium has just one electron in this level, boron has three, fluorine has seven, and neon has eight. 	carbon is an example of a metalloid	false
Nonmetals are elements that do not conduct electricity. They are the second largest class of elements. Find the nonmetals in Figure 6.3. They are all the elements on the right side of the table that are color-coded green. Examples of nonmetals include helium (He), carbon (C), and oxygen (O). Nonmetals generally have properties that are the opposite of those of metals. They also tend to vary more in their properties than metals do. For example, nonmetals have relatively low boiling points, so many of them are gases at room temperature. But several nonmetals are solids, including carbon and phosphorus (P). One nonmetal, bromine (Br), is a liquid at room temperature. Generally, nonmetals are also poor conductors of heat. In fact, they may be used for insulation. For example, the down filling in a down jacket is mostly air, which consists mainly of nitrogen (N) and oxygen (O). These nonmetal gases are poor conductors of heat, so they keep body heat in and cold air out. Solid nonmetals are dull rather than shiny. They are also brittle rather than ductile or malleable. You can see examples of solid nonmetals in Figure 6.6. You can learn more about specific nonmetals with the interactive table at this URL: http://library.thinkquest.org/36 	almost all nonmetals are solids are room temperature	false
Metalloids are elements that fall between metals and nonmetals in the periodic table. Just seven elements are metalloids, so they are the smallest class of elements. In Figure 6.3, they are color-coded orange. Examples of metalloids include boron (B), silicon (Si), and germanium (Ge). Metalloids have some properties of metals and some properties of nonmetals. For example, many metalloids can conduct electricity but only at certain temperatures. These metalloids are called semiconductors. Silicon is an example. It is used in computer chips. It is also the most common metalloid on Earth. It is shiny like a metal but brittle like a nonmetal. You see a sample of silicon in Figure 6.7. The figure also shows other examples of metalloids. You can learn more about the properties of metalloids at this URL: http://library.thinkquest.org/3659/p 	some nonmetals are semiconductors	false
Metalloids are elements that fall between metals and nonmetals in the periodic table. Just seven elements are metalloids, so they are the smallest class of elements. In Figure 6.3, they are color-coded orange. Examples of metalloids include boron (B), silicon (Si), and germanium (Ge). Metalloids have some properties of metals and some properties of nonmetals. For example, many metalloids can conduct electricity but only at certain temperatures. These metalloids are called semiconductors. Silicon is an example. It is used in computer chips. It is also the most common metalloid on Earth. It is shiny like a metal but brittle like a nonmetal. You see a sample of silicon in Figure 6.7. The figure also shows other examples of metalloids. You can learn more about the properties of metalloids at this URL: http://library.thinkquest.org/3659/p 	silicon is the most common metalloid on earth	true
The increase in electrons across the periodic table explains why elements go from metals to metalloids and then to nonmetals from left to right across the table. Look at period 2 in Figure 6.8 as an example. Lithium (Li) is a metal, boron (B) a metalloid, and fluorine (F) and neon (Ne) are nonmetals. The inner energy level is full for all four elements. This level has just one orbital and can hold a maximum of two electrons. The outer energy level is a different story. This level has four orbitals and can hold a maximum of eight electrons. Lithium has just one electron in this level, boron has three, fluorine has seven, and neon has eight. 	metals generally have fewer valence electrons than nonmetals	true
From left to right across the periodic table, each element has one more proton than the element to its left. Because atoms are always electrically neutral, for each added proton, one electron is also added. Electrons are added first to the lowest energy level possible until that level is full. Only then are electrons added to the next higher energy level. 	the number of valence electrons determines an elements reactivity	true
The increase in electrons across the periodic table explains why elements go from metals to metalloids and then to nonmetals from left to right across the table. Look at period 2 in Figure 6.8 as an example. Lithium (Li) is a metal, boron (B) a metalloid, and fluorine (F) and neon (Ne) are nonmetals. The inner energy level is full for all four elements. This level has just one orbital and can hold a maximum of two electrons. The outer energy level is a different story. This level has four orbitals and can hold a maximum of eight electrons. Lithium has just one electron in this level, boron has three, fluorine has seven, and neon has eight. 	elements that want to gain electrons are usually metals	false
From left to right across the periodic table, each element has one more proton than the element to its left. Because atoms are always electrically neutral, for each added proton, one electron is also added. Electrons are added first to the lowest energy level possible until that level is full. Only then are electrons added to the next higher energy level. 	the ability of an element to conduct electricity depends on its number of neutrons	false
The increase in electrons across the periodic table explains why elements go from metals to metalloids and then to nonmetals from left to right across the table. Look at period 2 in Figure 6.8 as an example. Lithium (Li) is a metal, boron (B) a metalloid, and fluorine (F) and neon (Ne) are nonmetals. The inner energy level is full for all four elements. This level has just one orbital and can hold a maximum of two electrons. The outer energy level is a different story. This level has four orbitals and can hold a maximum of eight electrons. Lithium has just one electron in this level, boron has three, fluorine has seven, and neon has eight. 	neon is more reactive than fluorine	false
Groups 3-12 of the periodic table contain transition metals (see Figure 6.11). Transition metals have more valence electrons and are less reactive than metals in the first two metal groups. The transition metals are shiny. Many are silver colored. They tend to be very hard, with high melting and boiling points. All except mercury (Hg) are solids at room temperature. Transition metals include the elements that are placed below the periodic table. Those that follow lanthanum (La) are called lanthanides. They are all shiny, relatively reactive metals. Those that follow Actinium (Ac) are called actinides. They are all radioactive metals. This means they are unstable. They break down into different, more stable elements. You can read more about radioactive elements in the chapter Nuclear Chemistry. Many of the actinides do not occur in nature but are made in laboratories. 	column of elements in the periodic table	1.f
Group 18 elements are nonmetals called noble gases (see Figure 6.14). They are all colorless, odorless gases. Their outer energy level is also full, so they are the least reactive elements. In nature, they seldom combine with other substances. For a short video about the noble gases and their properties, go to this URL: 	element in group 18 of the periodic table	2.d
Groups 3-12 of the periodic table contain transition metals (see Figure 6.11). Transition metals have more valence electrons and are less reactive than metals in the first two metal groups. The transition metals are shiny. Many are silver colored. They tend to be very hard, with high melting and boiling points. All except mercury (Hg) are solids at room temperature. Transition metals include the elements that are placed below the periodic table. Those that follow lanthanum (La) are called lanthanides. They are all shiny, relatively reactive metals. Those that follow Actinium (Ac) are called actinides. They are all radioactive metals. This means they are unstable. They break down into different, more stable elements. You can read more about radioactive elements in the chapter Nuclear Chemistry. Many of the actinides do not occur in nature but are made in laboratories. 	metal in group 1 of the periodic table	3.a
Groups 3-12 of the periodic table contain transition metals (see Figure 6.11). Transition metals have more valence electrons and are less reactive than metals in the first two metal groups. The transition metals are shiny. Many are silver colored. They tend to be very hard, with high melting and boiling points. All except mercury (Hg) are solids at room temperature. Transition metals include the elements that are placed below the periodic table. Those that follow lanthanum (La) are called lanthanides. They are all shiny, relatively reactive metals. Those that follow Actinium (Ac) are called actinides. They are all radioactive metals. This means they are unstable. They break down into different, more stable elements. You can read more about radioactive elements in the chapter Nuclear Chemistry. Many of the actinides do not occur in nature but are made in laboratories. 	radioactive transition metal	4.g
Groups 3-12 of the periodic table contain transition metals (see Figure 6.11). Transition metals have more valence electrons and are less reactive than metals in the first two metal groups. The transition metals are shiny. Many are silver colored. They tend to be very hard, with high melting and boiling points. All except mercury (Hg) are solids at room temperature. Transition metals include the elements that are placed below the periodic table. Those that follow lanthanum (La) are called lanthanides. They are all shiny, relatively reactive metals. Those that follow Actinium (Ac) are called actinides. They are all radioactive metals. This means they are unstable. They break down into different, more stable elements. You can read more about radioactive elements in the chapter Nuclear Chemistry. Many of the actinides do not occur in nature but are made in laboratories. 	metal in group 2 of the periodic table	5.b
Groups 3-12 of the periodic table contain transition metals (see Figure 6.11). Transition metals have more valence electrons and are less reactive than metals in the first two metal groups. The transition metals are shiny. Many are silver colored. They tend to be very hard, with high melting and boiling points. All except mercury (Hg) are solids at room temperature. Transition metals include the elements that are placed below the periodic table. Those that follow lanthanum (La) are called lanthanides. They are all shiny, relatively reactive metals. Those that follow Actinium (Ac) are called actinides. They are all radioactive metals. This means they are unstable. They break down into different, more stable elements. You can read more about radioactive elements in the chapter Nuclear Chemistry. Many of the actinides do not occur in nature but are made in laboratories. 	metal in group 3 of the periodic table	6.e
Elements in group 17 are called halogens (see Figure 6.13). They are highly reactive nonmetals with seven valence electrons. The halogens react violently with alkali metals, which have one valence electron. The two elements combine to form a salt. For example, the halogen chlorine (Cl) and the alkali metal sodium (Na) react to form table salt, or sodium chloride (NaCl). The halogen group includes gases, liquids, and solids. For example, chlorine is a gas at room temperature, bromine (Br) is a liquid, and iodine (I) is a solid. You can watch a video demonstrating the reactivity of halogens at this URL:  . 	nonmetal in group 17 of the periodic table	7.c
The alkaline Earth metals include all the elements in group 2 (see Figure 6.10). These metals have just two valence electrons, so they are very reactive, although not quite as reactive as the alkali metals. In nature, they are always found combined with other elements. Alkaline Earth metals are silvery grey in color. They are harder and denser than the alkali metals. All are solids at room temperature. 	the most reactive metals are the transition metals	false
The alkaline Earth metals include all the elements in group 2 (see Figure 6.10). These metals have just two valence electrons, so they are very reactive, although not quite as reactive as the alkali metals. In nature, they are always found combined with other elements. Alkaline Earth metals are silvery grey in color. They are harder and denser than the alkali metals. All are solids at room temperature. 	alkaline earth metals have three valence electrons	false
Elements in group 17 are called halogens (see Figure 6.13). They are highly reactive nonmetals with seven valence electrons. The halogens react violently with alkali metals, which have one valence electron. The two elements combine to form a salt. For example, the halogen chlorine (Cl) and the alkali metal sodium (Na) react to form table salt, or sodium chloride (NaCl). The halogen group includes gases, liquids, and solids. For example, chlorine is a gas at room temperature, bromine (Br) is a liquid, and iodine (I) is a solid. You can watch a video demonstrating the reactivity of halogens at this URL:  . 	mercury is the only metal that is a liquid at room temperature	true
Groups 13-16 each contain one or more metalloids. These groups are shown in Figure 6.12. Group 13 is called the boron group. The only metalloid in this group is boron (B). The other four elements are metals. All group 13 elements have three valence electrons and are fairly reactive. All are solids at room temperature. Group 14 is called the carbon group. Carbon (C) is a nonmetal. The next two elements are metalloids, and the final two are metals. All the elements in the carbon group have four valence electrons. They are not very reactive. All are solids at room temperature. Group 15 is called the nitrogen group. The first two elements in this group are nonmetals. These are followed by two metalloids and one metal. All the elements in the nitrogen group have five valence electrons, but they vary in their reactivity. Nitrogen (N) in not reactive at all. Phosphorus (P), in contrast, is quite reactive. In fact, it is found naturally only in combination with other substances. Nitrogen is a gas at room temperature. The other group 15 elements are solids. Group 16 is called the oxygen group. The first three elements in this group are nonmetals. They are followed by one metalloid and one metal. All the elements in the oxygen group have six valence electrons, and all are 	boron is an example of an element in the metalloids class	true
All the elements in group 1 have just one valence electron, so they are highly reactive. Group 1 is shown in Figure element in the universe. All the other elements in group 1 are alkali metals. They are the most reactive of all metals, and along with the elements in group 17, the most reactive elements. Because alkali metals are so reactive, they are only found in nature combined with other elements. The alkali metals are soft. Most are soft enough to cut with a knife. They are also low in density. Some of them even float on water. All are solids at room temperature. You can see a video demonstrating the reactivity of alkali metals with water at this URL:  (2:22). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	helium is an element in the group called the halogens	false
Elements in group 17 are called halogens (see Figure 6.13). They are highly reactive nonmetals with seven valence electrons. The halogens react violently with alkali metals, which have one valence electron. The two elements combine to form a salt. For example, the halogen chlorine (Cl) and the alkali metal sodium (Na) react to form table salt, or sodium chloride (NaCl). The halogen group includes gases, liquids, and solids. For example, chlorine is a gas at room temperature, bromine (Br) is a liquid, and iodine (I) is a solid. You can watch a video demonstrating the reactivity of halogens at this URL:  . 	hydrogen is an alkali metal	false
The alkaline Earth metals include all the elements in group 2 (see Figure 6.10). These metals have just two valence electrons, so they are very reactive, although not quite as reactive as the alkali metals. In nature, they are always found combined with other elements. Alkaline Earth metals are silvery grey in color. They are harder and denser than the alkali metals. All are solids at room temperature. 	alkali metals are found only in compounds	true
All the elements in group 1 have just one valence electron, so they are highly reactive. Group 1 is shown in Figure element in the universe. All the other elements in group 1 are alkali metals. They are the most reactive of all metals, and along with the elements in group 17, the most reactive elements. Because alkali metals are so reactive, they are only found in nature combined with other elements. The alkali metals are soft. Most are soft enough to cut with a knife. They are also low in density. Some of them even float on water. All are solids at room temperature. You can see a video demonstrating the reactivity of alkali metals with water at this URL:  (2:22). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	some alkali metals can float on water	true
Elements in group 17 are called halogens (see Figure 6.13). They are highly reactive nonmetals with seven valence electrons. The halogens react violently with alkali metals, which have one valence electron. The two elements combine to form a salt. For example, the halogen chlorine (Cl) and the alkali metal sodium (Na) react to form table salt, or sodium chloride (NaCl). The halogen group includes gases, liquids, and solids. For example, chlorine is a gas at room temperature, bromine (Br) is a liquid, and iodine (I) is a solid. You can watch a video demonstrating the reactivity of halogens at this URL:  . 	calcium is an alkali metal	false
The alkaline Earth metals include all the elements in group 2 (see Figure 6.10). These metals have just two valence electrons, so they are very reactive, although not quite as reactive as the alkali metals. In nature, they are always found combined with other elements. Alkaline Earth metals are silvery grey in color. They are harder and denser than the alkali metals. All are solids at room temperature. 	there is just one group of transition metals	false
Groups 3-12 of the periodic table contain transition metals (see Figure 6.11). Transition metals have more valence electrons and are less reactive than metals in the first two metal groups. The transition metals are shiny. Many are silver colored. They tend to be very hard, with high melting and boiling points. All except mercury (Hg) are solids at room temperature. Transition metals include the elements that are placed below the periodic table. Those that follow lanthanum (La) are called lanthanides. They are all shiny, relatively reactive metals. Those that follow Actinium (Ac) are called actinides. They are all radioactive metals. This means they are unstable. They break down into different, more stable elements. You can read more about radioactive elements in the chapter Nuclear Chemistry. Many of the actinides do not occur in nature but are made in laboratories. 	many of the actinides do not occur in nature	true
The alkaline Earth metals include all the elements in group 2 (see Figure 6.10). These metals have just two valence electrons, so they are very reactive, although not quite as reactive as the alkali metals. In nature, they are always found combined with other elements. Alkaline Earth metals are silvery grey in color. They are harder and denser than the alkali metals. All are solids at room temperature. 	elements in the oxygen group have eight valence electrons	false
The alkaline Earth metals include all the elements in group 2 (see Figure 6.10). These metals have just two valence electrons, so they are very reactive, although not quite as reactive as the alkali metals. In nature, they are always found combined with other elements. Alkaline Earth metals are silvery grey in color. They are harder and denser than the alkali metals. All are solids at room temperature. 	selenium is an alkaline earth metal	false
Elements in group 17 are called halogens (see Figure 6.13). They are highly reactive nonmetals with seven valence electrons. The halogens react violently with alkali metals, which have one valence electron. The two elements combine to form a salt. For example, the halogen chlorine (Cl) and the alkali metal sodium (Na) react to form table salt, or sodium chloride (NaCl). The halogen group includes gases, liquids, and solids. For example, chlorine is a gas at room temperature, bromine (Br) is a liquid, and iodine (I) is a solid. You can watch a video demonstrating the reactivity of halogens at this URL:  . 	the halogen group includes only gases	false
Group 18 elements are nonmetals called noble gases (see Figure 6.14). They are all colorless, odorless gases. Their outer energy level is also full, so they are the least reactive elements. In nature, they seldom combine with other substances. For a short video about the noble gases and their properties, go to this URL: 	noble gases are found only in combination with other elements	false
Water (H2 O) is an example of a chemical compound. Water molecules always consist of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen. Like water, all other chemical compounds consist of a fixed ratio of elements. It doesnt matter how much or how little of a compound there is. It always has the same composition. 	an oxygen atom has eight valence electrons	false
Water (H2 O) is an example of a chemical compound. Water molecules always consist of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen. Like water, all other chemical compounds consist of a fixed ratio of elements. It doesnt matter how much or how little of a compound there is. It always has the same composition. 	a molecule of carbon monoxide has two carbon atoms and one oxygen atom	false
There are different types of compounds. They differ in the nature of the bonds that hold their atoms together. The type of bonds in a compound determines many of its properties. Three types of bonds are ionic, covalent, and metallic bonds. You will read about these three types in later lessons. You can also learn more about them by watching this video:  (7:18). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the types of bonds in chemical compounds determine many of their properties	true
Water (H2 O) is an example of a chemical compound. Water molecules always consist of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen. Like water, all other chemical compounds consist of a fixed ratio of elements. It doesnt matter how much or how little of a compound there is. It always has the same composition. 	the same elements may form different compounds	true
The same elements may combine in different ratios. If they do, they form different compounds. Figure 7.2 shows some examples. Both water (H2 O) and hydrogen peroxide (H2 O2 ) consist of hydrogen and oxygen. However, they have different ratios of the two elements. As a result, water and hydrogen peroxide are different compounds with different properties. If youve ever used hydrogen peroxide to disinfect a cut, then you know that it is very different from water! Both carbon dioxide (CO2 ) and carbon monoxide (CO) consist of carbon and oxygen, but in different ratios. How do their properties differ? 	the chemical formula for carbon dioxide is co2 	true
Water (H2 O) is an example of a chemical compound. Water molecules always consist of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen. Like water, all other chemical compounds consist of a fixed ratio of elements. It doesnt matter how much or how little of a compound there is. It always has the same composition. 	a hydrogen atom has two electrons	false
Elements are represented by chemical symbols. Examples are H for hydrogen and O for oxygen. Compounds are represented by chemical formulas. Youve already seen the chemical formula for water. Its H2 O. The subscript 2 after the H shows that there are two atoms of hydrogen in a molecule of water. The O for oxygen has no subscript. When there is just one atom of an element in a molecule, no subscript is used. Table 7.1 shows some other examples of compounds and their chemical formulas. Name of Compound Electron Dot Diagram Numbers of Atoms Chemical Formula Name of Compound Hydrogen chloride Electron Dot Diagram Numbers of Atoms H=1 Cl = 1 Chemical Formula HCl Methane C=1 H=4 CH4 Hydrogen peroxide H=2 O=2 H2 O2 Carbon dioxide C=1 O=2 CO2 Problem Solving Problem: A molecule of ammonia consists of one atom of nitrogen (N) and three atoms of hydrogen (H). What is its chemical formula? Solution: The chemical formula is NH3 . You Try It! Problem: A molecule of nitrogen dioxide consists of one atom of nitrogen (N) and two atoms of oxygen (O). What is its chemical formula? 	each element is represented by a unique chemical formula	false
Water (H2 O) is an example of a chemical compound. Water molecules always consist of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen. Like water, all other chemical compounds consist of a fixed ratio of elements. It doesnt matter how much or how little of a compound there is. It always has the same composition. 	the compound carbon dioxide has twice as many oxygen atoms as carbon atoms	true
Water (H2 O) is an example of a chemical compound. Water molecules always consist of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen. Like water, all other chemical compounds consist of a fixed ratio of elements. It doesnt matter how much or how little of a compound there is. It always has the same composition. 	the same elements may combine in different ratios to form the same compound	false
Water (H2 O) is an example of a chemical compound. Water molecules always consist of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen. Like water, all other chemical compounds consist of a fixed ratio of elements. It doesnt matter how much or how little of a compound there is. It always has the same composition. 	any molecule that contains only hydrogen and oxygen is water	false
There are different types of compounds. They differ in the nature of the bonds that hold their atoms together. The type of bonds in a compound determines many of its properties. Three types of bonds are ionic, covalent, and metallic bonds. You will read about these three types in later lessons. You can also learn more about them by watching this video:  (7:18). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	different types of compounds differ in the types of bonds that hold their atoms together	true
Water (H2 O) is an example of a chemical compound. Water molecules always consist of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen. Like water, all other chemical compounds consist of a fixed ratio of elements. It doesnt matter how much or how little of a compound there is. It always has the same composition. 	both coal and diamond consist of atoms of carbon that are bonded together	true
Water (H2 O) is an example of a chemical compound. Water molecules always consist of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen. Like water, all other chemical compounds consist of a fixed ratio of elements. It doesnt matter how much or how little of a compound there is. It always has the same composition. 	most of the unique substances on earth are compounds	true
Elements form compounds when they combine chemically. Their atoms join together to form molecules, crystals, or other structures. The atoms are held together by chemical bonds. A chemical bond is a force of attraction between atoms or ions. It occurs when atoms share or transfer valence electrons. Valence electrons are the electrons in the outer energy level of an atom. You can learn more about chemical bonds in this video:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Look at the example of water in Figure 7.1. A water molecule consists of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen. Each hydrogen atom has just one electron. The oxygen atom has six valence electrons. In a water molecule, two hydrogen atoms share their two electrons with the six valence electrons of one oxygen atom. By sharing electrons, each atom has electrons available to fill its sole or outer energy level. This gives it a more stable arrangement of electrons that takes less energy to maintain. 	when atoms combine chemically they form mixtures	false
Water (H2 O) is an example of a chemical compound. Water molecules always consist of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen. Like water, all other chemical compounds consist of a fixed ratio of elements. It doesnt matter how much or how little of a compound there is. It always has the same composition. 	a chemical bond consists of matter that connects two different atoms	false
Elements form compounds when they combine chemically. Their atoms join together to form molecules, crystals, or other structures. The atoms are held together by chemical bonds. A chemical bond is a force of attraction between atoms or ions. It occurs when atoms share or transfer valence electrons. Valence electrons are the electrons in the outer energy level of an atom. You can learn more about chemical bonds in this video:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Look at the example of water in Figure 7.1. A water molecule consists of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen. Each hydrogen atom has just one electron. The oxygen atom has six valence electrons. In a water molecule, two hydrogen atoms share their two electrons with the six valence electrons of one oxygen atom. By sharing electrons, each atom has electrons available to fill its sole or outer energy level. This gives it a more stable arrangement of electrons that takes less energy to maintain. 	pure substance that cannot be separated into any other substances	1.e
The same elements may combine in different ratios. If they do, they form different compounds. Figure 7.2 shows some examples. Both water (H2 O) and hydrogen peroxide (H2 O2 ) consist of hydrogen and oxygen. However, they have different ratios of the two elements. As a result, water and hydrogen peroxide are different compounds with different properties. If youve ever used hydrogen peroxide to disinfect a cut, then you know that it is very different from water! Both carbon dioxide (CO2 ) and carbon monoxide (CO) consist of carbon and oxygen, but in different ratios. How do their properties differ? 	unique substance that forms when elements combine chemically	2.c
Water (H2 O) is an example of a chemical compound. Water molecules always consist of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen. Like water, all other chemical compounds consist of a fixed ratio of elements. It doesnt matter how much or how little of a compound there is. It always has the same composition. 	particle of a compound that forms when atoms bond together	3.f
Water (H2 O) is an example of a chemical compound. Water molecules always consist of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen. Like water, all other chemical compounds consist of a fixed ratio of elements. It doesnt matter how much or how little of a compound there is. It always has the same composition. 	one of three types of chemical compounds	4.g
Water (H2 O) is an example of a chemical compound. Water molecules always consist of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen. Like water, all other chemical compounds consist of a fixed ratio of elements. It doesnt matter how much or how little of a compound there is. It always has the same composition. 	symbol representing a chemical compound	5.b
Elements form compounds when they combine chemically. Their atoms join together to form molecules, crystals, or other structures. The atoms are held together by chemical bonds. A chemical bond is a force of attraction between atoms or ions. It occurs when atoms share or transfer valence electrons. Valence electrons are the electrons in the outer energy level of an atom. You can learn more about chemical bonds in this video:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Look at the example of water in Figure 7.1. A water molecule consists of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen. Each hydrogen atom has just one electron. The oxygen atom has six valence electrons. In a water molecule, two hydrogen atoms share their two electrons with the six valence electrons of one oxygen atom. By sharing electrons, each atom has electrons available to fill its sole or outer energy level. This gives it a more stable arrangement of electrons that takes less energy to maintain. 	particle in the outer energy level of an atom	6.d
Elements form compounds when they combine chemically. Their atoms join together to form molecules, crystals, or other structures. The atoms are held together by chemical bonds. A chemical bond is a force of attraction between atoms or ions. It occurs when atoms share or transfer valence electrons. Valence electrons are the electrons in the outer energy level of an atom. You can learn more about chemical bonds in this video:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Look at the example of water in Figure 7.1. A water molecule consists of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen. Each hydrogen atom has just one electron. The oxygen atom has six valence electrons. In a water molecule, two hydrogen atoms share their two electrons with the six valence electrons of one oxygen atom. By sharing electrons, each atom has electrons available to fill its sole or outer energy level. This gives it a more stable arrangement of electrons that takes less energy to maintain. 	force of attraction between atoms or ions that share or transfer electrons	7.a
Ionic compounds have many uses. Some are shown in Figure 7.6. Many ionic compounds are used in industry. The human body also needs several ions for good health. Having low levels of the ions can endanger important functions such as heartbeat. Solutions of ionic compounds can be used to restore the ions. 	ionic compounds form when ions share electrons	false
Ionic bonds form only between metals and nonmetals. Metals "want" to give up electrons, and nonmetals "want" to gain electrons. Find sodium (Na) in Figure 7.4. Sodium is an alkali metal in group 1. Like other group 1 elements, it has just one valence electron. If sodium loses that one electron, it will have a full outer energy level. Now find fluorine (F) in Figure 7.4. Fluorine is a halogen in group 17. It has seven valence electrons. If fluorine gains one electron, it will have a full outer energy level. After sodium gives up its valence electron to fluorine, both atoms have a more stable arrangement of electrons. 	in sodium chloride sodium loses an electron to chlorine	true
Ionic bonds form only between metals and nonmetals. Metals "want" to give up electrons, and nonmetals "want" to gain electrons. Find sodium (Na) in Figure 7.4. Sodium is an alkali metal in group 1. Like other group 1 elements, it has just one valence electron. If sodium loses that one electron, it will have a full outer energy level. Now find fluorine (F) in Figure 7.4. Fluorine is a halogen in group 17. It has seven valence electrons. If fluorine gains one electron, it will have a full outer energy level. After sodium gives up its valence electron to fluorine, both atoms have a more stable arrangement of electrons. 	ionic bonds form only between atoms of nonmetals	false
It takes energy to remove valence electrons from an atom. The force of attraction between the negative electrons and positive nucleus must be overcome. The amount of energy needed depends on the element. Less energy is needed to remove just one or a few electrons than many. This explains why sodium and other alkali metals form positive ions so easily. Less energy is also needed to remove electrons from larger atoms in the same group. For example, in group 1, it takes less energy to remove an electron from francium (Fr) at the bottom of the group than from lithium (Li) at the top of the group (see Figure 7.4). In bigger atoms, valence electrons are farther from the nucleus. As a result, the force of attraction between the electrons and nucleus is weaker. What happens when an atom gains an electron and becomes a negative ion? Energy is released. Halogens release the most energy when they form ions. As a result, they are very reactive. 	the amount of energy needed to form an ion depends only on the number of valence electrons	false
It takes energy to remove valence electrons from an atom. The force of attraction between the negative electrons and positive nucleus must be overcome. The amount of energy needed depends on the element. Less energy is needed to remove just one or a few electrons than many. This explains why sodium and other alkali metals form positive ions so easily. Less energy is also needed to remove electrons from larger atoms in the same group. For example, in group 1, it takes less energy to remove an electron from francium (Fr) at the bottom of the group than from lithium (Li) at the top of the group (see Figure 7.4). In bigger atoms, valence electrons are farther from the nucleus. As a result, the force of attraction between the electrons and nucleus is weaker. What happens when an atom gains an electron and becomes a negative ion? Energy is released. Halogens release the most energy when they form ions. As a result, they are very reactive. 	francium has the same number of valence electrons as lithium	true
It takes energy to remove valence electrons from an atom. The force of attraction between the negative electrons and positive nucleus must be overcome. The amount of energy needed depends on the element. Less energy is needed to remove just one or a few electrons than many. This explains why sodium and other alkali metals form positive ions so easily. Less energy is also needed to remove electrons from larger atoms in the same group. For example, in group 1, it takes less energy to remove an electron from francium (Fr) at the bottom of the group than from lithium (Li) at the top of the group (see Figure 7.4). In bigger atoms, valence electrons are farther from the nucleus. As a result, the force of attraction between the electrons and nucleus is weaker. What happens when an atom gains an electron and becomes a negative ion? Energy is released. Halogens release the most energy when they form ions. As a result, they are very reactive. 	alkali metals release the most energy when they become ions	false
Ionic compounds contain ions of metals and nonmetals held together by ionic bonds. Ionic compounds do not form molecules. Instead, many positive and negative ions bond together to form a structure called a crystal. You can see an example of a crystal in Figure 7.5. It shows the ionic compound sodium chloride. Positive sodium ions (Na+ ) alternate with negative chloride ions (Cl ). The oppositely charged ions are strongly attracted to each other. Helpful Hints Naming Ionic Compounds Ionic compounds are named for their positive and negative ions. The name of the positive 	salt consists of molecules of sodium and chloride ions	false
It takes energy to remove valence electrons from an atom. The force of attraction between the negative electrons and positive nucleus must be overcome. The amount of energy needed depends on the element. Less energy is needed to remove just one or a few electrons than many. This explains why sodium and other alkali metals form positive ions so easily. Less energy is also needed to remove electrons from larger atoms in the same group. For example, in group 1, it takes less energy to remove an electron from francium (Fr) at the bottom of the group than from lithium (Li) at the top of the group (see Figure 7.4). In bigger atoms, valence electrons are farther from the nucleus. As a result, the force of attraction between the electrons and nucleus is weaker. What happens when an atom gains an electron and becomes a negative ion? Energy is released. Halogens release the most energy when they form ions. As a result, they are very reactive. 	when an atom of iodine becomes an ion it is named iodide	true
Ionic compounds have many uses. Some are shown in Figure 7.6. Many ionic compounds are used in industry. The human body also needs several ions for good health. Having low levels of the ions can endanger important functions such as heartbeat. Solutions of ionic compounds can be used to restore the ions. 	ionic compounds are usually liquids at room temperature	false
Ionic compounds have many uses. Some are shown in Figure 7.6. Many ionic compounds are used in industry. The human body also needs several ions for good health. Having low levels of the ions can endanger important functions such as heartbeat. Solutions of ionic compounds can be used to restore the ions. 	water is an example of an ionic compound	false
Ionic bonds form only between metals and nonmetals. Metals "want" to give up electrons, and nonmetals "want" to gain electrons. Find sodium (Na) in Figure 7.4. Sodium is an alkali metal in group 1. Like other group 1 elements, it has just one valence electron. If sodium loses that one electron, it will have a full outer energy level. Now find fluorine (F) in Figure 7.4. Fluorine is a halogen in group 17. It has seven valence electrons. If fluorine gains one electron, it will have a full outer energy level. After sodium gives up its valence electron to fluorine, both atoms have a more stable arrangement of electrons. 	an ionic bond forms when atoms of a nonmetal give up electrons to atoms of a metal	false
An ionic bond is the force of attraction that holds together positive and negative ions. It forms when atoms of a metallic element give up electrons to atoms of a nonmetallic element. Figure 7.3 shows how this happens. In row 1 of Figure 7.3, an atom of sodium donates an electron to an atom of chlorine (Cl). By losing an electron, the sodium atom becomes a sodium ion. It now has one less electron than protons, giving it a charge of +1. Positive ions such as sodium are given the same name as the element. The chemical symbol has a plus sign to distinguish the ion from an atom of the element. The symbol for a sodium ion is Na+ . By gaining an electron, the chlorine atom becomes a chloride ion. It now has one more electron than protons, giving it a charge of -1. Negative ions are named by adding the suffix ide to the first part of the element name. The symbol for chloride is Cl . Sodium and chloride ions have equal but opposite charges. Opposites attract, so sodium and chloride ions attract each other. They cling together in a strong ionic bond. You can see this in row 2 of Figure 7.3. Brackets separate the ions in the diagram to show that the ions in the compound do not share electrons. You can see animations of sodium chloride forming at these URLs: http://web.jjay.cuny.edu/~acarpi/NSC/salt.htm 	sodium and chloride ions have equal but opposite charges	true
Ionic bonds form only between metals and nonmetals. Metals "want" to give up electrons, and nonmetals "want" to gain electrons. Find sodium (Na) in Figure 7.4. Sodium is an alkali metal in group 1. Like other group 1 elements, it has just one valence electron. If sodium loses that one electron, it will have a full outer energy level. Now find fluorine (F) in Figure 7.4. Fluorine is a halogen in group 17. It has seven valence electrons. If fluorine gains one electron, it will have a full outer energy level. After sodium gives up its valence electron to fluorine, both atoms have a more stable arrangement of electrons. 	metals need energy in order to become ions	true
Ionic bonds form only between metals and nonmetals. Metals "want" to give up electrons, and nonmetals "want" to gain electrons. Find sodium (Na) in Figure 7.4. Sodium is an alkali metal in group 1. Like other group 1 elements, it has just one valence electron. If sodium loses that one electron, it will have a full outer energy level. Now find fluorine (F) in Figure 7.4. Fluorine is a halogen in group 17. It has seven valence electrons. If fluorine gains one electron, it will have a full outer energy level. After sodium gives up its valence electron to fluorine, both atoms have a more stable arrangement of electrons. 	the bonds of crystals are very weak	false
Ionic compounds have many uses. Some are shown in Figure 7.6. Many ionic compounds are used in industry. The human body also needs several ions for good health. Having low levels of the ions can endanger important functions such as heartbeat. Solutions of ionic compounds can be used to restore the ions. 	solid ionic compounds are good conductors of electricity	false
Ionic compounds have many uses. Some are shown in Figure 7.6. Many ionic compounds are used in industry. The human body also needs several ions for good health. Having low levels of the ions can endanger important functions such as heartbeat. Solutions of ionic compounds can be used to restore the ions. 	dissolved ionic compound	1.e
Ionic bonds form only between metals and nonmetals. Metals "want" to give up electrons, and nonmetals "want" to gain electrons. Find sodium (Na) in Figure 7.4. Sodium is an alkali metal in group 1. Like other group 1 elements, it has just one valence electron. If sodium loses that one electron, it will have a full outer energy level. Now find fluorine (F) in Figure 7.4. Fluorine is a halogen in group 17. It has seven valence electrons. If fluorine gains one electron, it will have a full outer energy level. After sodium gives up its valence electron to fluorine, both atoms have a more stable arrangement of electrons. 	unique substance that forms when a metal and a nonmetal combine chemically	2.c
Ionic bonds form only between metals and nonmetals. Metals "want" to give up electrons, and nonmetals "want" to gain electrons. Find sodium (Na) in Figure 7.4. Sodium is an alkali metal in group 1. Like other group 1 elements, it has just one valence electron. If sodium loses that one electron, it will have a full outer energy level. Now find fluorine (F) in Figure 7.4. Fluorine is a halogen in group 17. It has seven valence electrons. If fluorine gains one electron, it will have a full outer energy level. After sodium gives up its valence electron to fluorine, both atoms have a more stable arrangement of electrons. 	example of an alkali metal	3.f
It takes energy to remove valence electrons from an atom. The force of attraction between the negative electrons and positive nucleus must be overcome. The amount of energy needed depends on the element. Less energy is needed to remove just one or a few electrons than many. This explains why sodium and other alkali metals form positive ions so easily. Less energy is also needed to remove electrons from larger atoms in the same group. For example, in group 1, it takes less energy to remove an electron from francium (Fr) at the bottom of the group than from lithium (Li) at the top of the group (see Figure 7.4). In bigger atoms, valence electrons are farther from the nucleus. As a result, the force of attraction between the electrons and nucleus is weaker. What happens when an atom gains an electron and becomes a negative ion? Energy is released. Halogens release the most energy when they form ions. As a result, they are very reactive. 	force of attraction that holds together positive and negative ions	4.b
It takes energy to remove valence electrons from an atom. The force of attraction between the negative electrons and positive nucleus must be overcome. The amount of energy needed depends on the element. Less energy is needed to remove just one or a few electrons than many. This explains why sodium and other alkali metals form positive ions so easily. Less energy is also needed to remove electrons from larger atoms in the same group. For example, in group 1, it takes less energy to remove an electron from francium (Fr) at the bottom of the group than from lithium (Li) at the top of the group (see Figure 7.4). In bigger atoms, valence electrons are farther from the nucleus. As a result, the force of attraction between the electrons and nucleus is weaker. What happens when an atom gains an electron and becomes a negative ion? Energy is released. Halogens release the most energy when they form ions. As a result, they are very reactive. 	example of a negative ion	5.g
Ionic bonds form only between metals and nonmetals. Metals "want" to give up electrons, and nonmetals "want" to gain electrons. Find sodium (Na) in Figure 7.4. Sodium is an alkali metal in group 1. Like other group 1 elements, it has just one valence electron. If sodium loses that one electron, it will have a full outer energy level. Now find fluorine (F) in Figure 7.4. Fluorine is a halogen in group 17. It has seven valence electrons. If fluorine gains one electron, it will have a full outer energy level. After sodium gives up its valence electron to fluorine, both atoms have a more stable arrangement of electrons. 	charged particle that forms when an atom gains or loses electrons	6.a
Ionic compounds contain ions of metals and nonmetals held together by ionic bonds. Ionic compounds do not form molecules. Instead, many positive and negative ions bond together to form a structure called a crystal. You can see an example of a crystal in Figure 7.5. It shows the ionic compound sodium chloride. Positive sodium ions (Na+ ) alternate with negative chloride ions (Cl ). The oppositely charged ions are strongly attracted to each other. Helpful Hints Naming Ionic Compounds Ionic compounds are named for their positive and negative ions. The name of the positive 	structure that forms when many positive and negative ions bond together	7.d
A covalent bond is the force of attraction that holds together two atoms that share a pair of electrons. The shared electrons are attracted to the nuclei of both atoms. Covalent bonds form only between atoms of nonmetals. The two atoms may be the same or different elements. If the bonds form between atoms of different elements, a covalent compound forms. Covalent compounds are described in detail later in the lesson. To see a video about covalent bonding, go to this URL:  (6:20). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Figure 7.7 shows an example of a covalent bond forming between two atoms of the same element, in this case two atoms of hydrogen. The two atoms share a pair of electrons. Hydrogen normally occurs in two-atom, or diatomic, molecules like this (di- means "two"). Several other elements also normally occur as diatomic molecules: nitrogen, oxygen, and all but one of the halogens (fluorine, chlorine, bromine, and iodine). 	any compound consisting of two or more nonmetals	1.g
In some covalent bonds, electrons are not shared equally between the two atoms. These are called polar bonds. Figure 7.9 shows this for water. The oxygen atom attracts the shared electrons more strongly because its nucleus has more positively charged protons. As a result, the oxygen atom becomes slightly negative in charge. The hydrogen atoms attract the electrons less strongly. They become slightly positive in charge. For another example of polar bonds, see the video at this URL:  (0:52). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  In other covalent bonds, electrons are shared equally. These bonds are called nonpolar bonds. Neither atom attracts the shared electrons more strongly. As a result, the atoms remain neutral. Figure 7.10 shows an example of nonpolar bonds. 	covalent bond in which neither atom has an electric charge	2.d
A covalent bond is the force of attraction that holds together two atoms that share a pair of electrons. The shared electrons are attracted to the nuclei of both atoms. Covalent bonds form only between atoms of nonmetals. The two atoms may be the same or different elements. If the bonds form between atoms of different elements, a covalent compound forms. Covalent compounds are described in detail later in the lesson. To see a video about covalent bonding, go to this URL:  (6:20). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Figure 7.7 shows an example of a covalent bond forming between two atoms of the same element, in this case two atoms of hydrogen. The two atoms share a pair of electrons. Hydrogen normally occurs in two-atom, or diatomic, molecules like this (di- means "two"). Several other elements also normally occur as diatomic molecules: nitrogen, oxygen, and all but one of the halogens (fluorine, chlorine, bromine, and iodine). 	covalent bond between two atoms of the same element	3.e
Covalent bonds form because they give atoms a more stable arrangement of electrons. Look at the hydrogen atoms in Figure 7.7. Alone, each hydrogen atom has just one electron. By sharing electrons with another hydrogen atom, it has two electrons: its own and the one in the other hydrogen atom. The shared electrons are attracted to both hydrogen nuclei. This force of attraction holds the two atoms together as a molecule of hydrogen. Some atoms need to share more than one pair of electrons to have a full outer energy level. For example, an oxygen atom has six valence electrons. It needs two more electrons to fill its outer energy level. Therefore, it must form two covalent bonds. This can happen in many different ways. One way is shown in Figure 7.8. The oxygen atom in the figure has covalent bonds with two hydrogen atoms. This forms the covalent compound water. 	force of attraction holding together two atoms that share a pair of electrons	4.a
Having polar bonds may make a covalent compound polar. A polar compound is one in which there is a slight difference in charge between opposite ends of the molecule. All polar compounds contain polar bonds. But having polar bonds does not necessarily result in a polar compound. It depends on how the atoms are arranged. This is illustrated in Figure 7.11. Both molecules in the figure contain polar bonds, but only formaldehyde is a polar compound. Why is carbon dioxide nonpolar? The molecules of polar compounds are attracted to each other. You can see this in Figure 7.12 for water. A bond forms between the positive hydrogen end of one water molecule and the negative oxygen end of another water molecule. This type of bond is called a hydrogen bond. Hydrogen bonds are weak, but they still must be overcome when a polar substance changes from a solid to a liquid or from a liquid to a gas. As a result, polar covalent compounds may have higher melting and boiling points than nonpolar covalent compounds. To learn more about hydrogen bonding and when it occurs, see the video at this URL:  (0:58). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	weak bond that forms between oppositely charged ends of two molecules	5.b
In some covalent bonds, electrons are not shared equally between the two atoms. These are called polar bonds. Figure 7.9 shows this for water. The oxygen atom attracts the shared electrons more strongly because its nucleus has more positively charged protons. As a result, the oxygen atom becomes slightly negative in charge. The hydrogen atoms attract the electrons less strongly. They become slightly positive in charge. For another example of polar bonds, see the video at this URL:  (0:52). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  In other covalent bonds, electrons are shared equally. These bonds are called nonpolar bonds. Neither atom attracts the shared electrons more strongly. As a result, the atoms remain neutral. Figure 7.10 shows an example of nonpolar bonds. 	covalent bond in which the two atoms are oppositely charged	6.c
Having polar bonds may make a covalent compound polar. A polar compound is one in which there is a slight difference in charge between opposite ends of the molecule. All polar compounds contain polar bonds. But having polar bonds does not necessarily result in a polar compound. It depends on how the atoms are arranged. This is illustrated in Figure 7.11. Both molecules in the figure contain polar bonds, but only formaldehyde is a polar compound. Why is carbon dioxide nonpolar? The molecules of polar compounds are attracted to each other. You can see this in Figure 7.12 for water. A bond forms between the positive hydrogen end of one water molecule and the negative oxygen end of another water molecule. This type of bond is called a hydrogen bond. Hydrogen bonds are weak, but they still must be overcome when a polar substance changes from a solid to a liquid or from a liquid to a gas. As a result, polar covalent compounds may have higher melting and boiling points than nonpolar covalent compounds. To learn more about hydrogen bonding and when it occurs, see the video at this URL:  (0:58). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	compound in which molecules have oppositely charged ends	7.f
Covalent bonds form because they give atoms a more stable arrangement of electrons. Look at the hydrogen atoms in Figure 7.7. Alone, each hydrogen atom has just one electron. By sharing electrons with another hydrogen atom, it has two electrons: its own and the one in the other hydrogen atom. The shared electrons are attracted to both hydrogen nuclei. This force of attraction holds the two atoms together as a molecule of hydrogen. Some atoms need to share more than one pair of electrons to have a full outer energy level. For example, an oxygen atom has six valence electrons. It needs two more electrons to fill its outer energy level. Therefore, it must form two covalent bonds. This can happen in many different ways. One way is shown in Figure 7.8. The oxygen atom in the figure has covalent bonds with two hydrogen atoms. This forms the covalent compound water. 	covalent bonds form only between atoms of different elements	false
Covalent bonds form because they give atoms a more stable arrangement of electrons. Look at the hydrogen atoms in Figure 7.7. Alone, each hydrogen atom has just one electron. By sharing electrons with another hydrogen atom, it has two electrons: its own and the one in the other hydrogen atom. The shared electrons are attracted to both hydrogen nuclei. This force of attraction holds the two atoms together as a molecule of hydrogen. Some atoms need to share more than one pair of electrons to have a full outer energy level. For example, an oxygen atom has six valence electrons. It needs two more electrons to fill its outer energy level. Therefore, it must form two covalent bonds. This can happen in many different ways. One way is shown in Figure 7.8. The oxygen atom in the figure has covalent bonds with two hydrogen atoms. This forms the covalent compound water. 	a single covalent bond involves just one valence electron	false
Covalent bonds form because they give atoms a more stable arrangement of electrons. Look at the hydrogen atoms in Figure 7.7. Alone, each hydrogen atom has just one electron. By sharing electrons with another hydrogen atom, it has two electrons: its own and the one in the other hydrogen atom. The shared electrons are attracted to both hydrogen nuclei. This force of attraction holds the two atoms together as a molecule of hydrogen. Some atoms need to share more than one pair of electrons to have a full outer energy level. For example, an oxygen atom has six valence electrons. It needs two more electrons to fill its outer energy level. Therefore, it must form two covalent bonds. This can happen in many different ways. One way is shown in Figure 7.8. The oxygen atom in the figure has covalent bonds with two hydrogen atoms. This forms the covalent compound water. 	sharing electrons allows atoms to have a full outer energy level	true
Covalent bonds form because they give atoms a more stable arrangement of electrons. Look at the hydrogen atoms in Figure 7.7. Alone, each hydrogen atom has just one electron. By sharing electrons with another hydrogen atom, it has two electrons: its own and the one in the other hydrogen atom. The shared electrons are attracted to both hydrogen nuclei. This force of attraction holds the two atoms together as a molecule of hydrogen. Some atoms need to share more than one pair of electrons to have a full outer energy level. For example, an oxygen atom has six valence electrons. It needs two more electrons to fill its outer energy level. Therefore, it must form two covalent bonds. This can happen in many different ways. One way is shown in Figure 7.8. The oxygen atom in the figure has covalent bonds with two hydrogen atoms. This forms the covalent compound water. 	each hydrogen atom can form two covalent bonds	false
In some covalent bonds, electrons are not shared equally between the two atoms. These are called polar bonds. Figure 7.9 shows this for water. The oxygen atom attracts the shared electrons more strongly because its nucleus has more positively charged protons. As a result, the oxygen atom becomes slightly negative in charge. The hydrogen atoms attract the electrons less strongly. They become slightly positive in charge. For another example of polar bonds, see the video at this URL:  (0:52). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  In other covalent bonds, electrons are shared equally. These bonds are called nonpolar bonds. Neither atom attracts the shared electrons more strongly. As a result, the atoms remain neutral. Figure 7.10 shows an example of nonpolar bonds. 	the hydrogen end of a water molecule is slightly negative in charge	false
Covalent compounds have different properties than ionic compounds because of their bonds. Covalent compounds exist as individual molecules rather than crystals. It takes less energy for individual molecules than ions in a crystal to pull apart. As a result, covalent compounds have lower melting and boiling points than ionic compounds. Many are gases or liquids at room temperature. Covalent compounds have shared electrons. These are not free to move like the transferred electrons of ionic compounds. This makes covalent compounds poor conductors of electricity. Many covalent compounds also do not dissolve in water as all ionic compounds do. 	covalent bonds are found only in covalent compounds	false
A covalent bond is the force of attraction that holds together two atoms that share a pair of electrons. The shared electrons are attracted to the nuclei of both atoms. Covalent bonds form only between atoms of nonmetals. The two atoms may be the same or different elements. If the bonds form between atoms of different elements, a covalent compound forms. Covalent compounds are described in detail later in the lesson. To see a video about covalent bonding, go to this URL:  (6:20). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Figure 7.7 shows an example of a covalent bond forming between two atoms of the same element, in this case two atoms of hydrogen. The two atoms share a pair of electrons. Hydrogen normally occurs in two-atom, or diatomic, molecules like this (di- means "two"). Several other elements also normally occur as diatomic molecules: nitrogen, oxygen, and all but one of the halogens (fluorine, chlorine, bromine, and iodine). 	some covalent compounds contain atoms of just one element	false
Covalent bonds form because they give atoms a more stable arrangement of electrons. Look at the hydrogen atoms in Figure 7.7. Alone, each hydrogen atom has just one electron. By sharing electrons with another hydrogen atom, it has two electrons: its own and the one in the other hydrogen atom. The shared electrons are attracted to both hydrogen nuclei. This force of attraction holds the two atoms together as a molecule of hydrogen. Some atoms need to share more than one pair of electrons to have a full outer energy level. For example, an oxygen atom has six valence electrons. It needs two more electrons to fill its outer energy level. Therefore, it must form two covalent bonds. This can happen in many different ways. One way is shown in Figure 7.8. The oxygen atom in the figure has covalent bonds with two hydrogen atoms. This forms the covalent compound water. 	formaldehyde is an example of a covalent compound	true
Covalent bonds between atoms of different elements form covalent compounds. The smallest, simplest covalent compounds have molecules with just two atoms. An example is hydrogen chloride (HCl). It consists of one hydrogen atom and one chlorine atom. The largest, most complex covalent molecules have thousands of atoms. Examples include proteins and carbohydrates. These are compounds in living things. Helpful Hints Naming Covalent Compounds Follow these rules in naming simple covalent compounds: The element closer to the left of the periodic table is named first. The second element gets the suffix ide. Prefixes such as di- (2) and tri- (3) show the number of each atom in the compound. These are written with subscripts in the chemical formula. Example: The gas that consists of one carbon atom and two oxygen atoms is named carbon dioxide. Its chemical formula is CO2 . You Try It! Problem: What is the name of the compound that contains three oxygen atoms and two nitrogen atoms? What is its chemical formula? 	oxygen gas consists of individual oxygen atoms	false
Covalent bonds form because they give atoms a more stable arrangement of electrons. Look at the hydrogen atoms in Figure 7.7. Alone, each hydrogen atom has just one electron. By sharing electrons with another hydrogen atom, it has two electrons: its own and the one in the other hydrogen atom. The shared electrons are attracted to both hydrogen nuclei. This force of attraction holds the two atoms together as a molecule of hydrogen. Some atoms need to share more than one pair of electrons to have a full outer energy level. For example, an oxygen atom has six valence electrons. It needs two more electrons to fill its outer energy level. Therefore, it must form two covalent bonds. This can happen in many different ways. One way is shown in Figure 7.8. The oxygen atom in the figure has covalent bonds with two hydrogen atoms. This forms the covalent compound water. 	an oxygen atom forms two covalent bonds	true
In some covalent bonds, electrons are not shared equally between the two atoms. These are called polar bonds. Figure 7.9 shows this for water. The oxygen atom attracts the shared electrons more strongly because its nucleus has more positively charged protons. As a result, the oxygen atom becomes slightly negative in charge. The hydrogen atoms attract the electrons less strongly. They become slightly positive in charge. For another example of polar bonds, see the video at this URL:  (0:52). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  In other covalent bonds, electrons are shared equally. These bonds are called nonpolar bonds. Neither atom attracts the shared electrons more strongly. As a result, the atoms remain neutral. Figure 7.10 shows an example of nonpolar bonds. 	oxygen always becomes negatively charged when it forms covalent bonds	false
Covalent bonds between atoms of different elements form covalent compounds. The smallest, simplest covalent compounds have molecules with just two atoms. An example is hydrogen chloride (HCl). It consists of one hydrogen atom and one chlorine atom. The largest, most complex covalent molecules have thousands of atoms. Examples include proteins and carbohydrates. These are compounds in living things. Helpful Hints Naming Covalent Compounds Follow these rules in naming simple covalent compounds: The element closer to the left of the periodic table is named first. The second element gets the suffix ide. Prefixes such as di- (2) and tri- (3) show the number of each atom in the compound. These are written with subscripts in the chemical formula. Example: The gas that consists of one carbon atom and two oxygen atoms is named carbon dioxide. Its chemical formula is CO2 . You Try It! Problem: What is the name of the compound that contains three oxygen atoms and two nitrogen atoms? What is its chemical formula? 	in naming a covalent compound the element closest to the right of the periodic table is named first	false
Covalent bonds between atoms of different elements form covalent compounds. The smallest, simplest covalent compounds have molecules with just two atoms. An example is hydrogen chloride (HCl). It consists of one hydrogen atom and one chlorine atom. The largest, most complex covalent molecules have thousands of atoms. Examples include proteins and carbohydrates. These are compounds in living things. Helpful Hints Naming Covalent Compounds Follow these rules in naming simple covalent compounds: The element closer to the left of the periodic table is named first. The second element gets the suffix ide. Prefixes such as di- (2) and tri- (3) show the number of each atom in the compound. These are written with subscripts in the chemical formula. Example: The gas that consists of one carbon atom and two oxygen atoms is named carbon dioxide. Its chemical formula is CO2 . You Try It! Problem: What is the name of the compound that contains three oxygen atoms and two nitrogen atoms? What is its chemical formula? 	the second element named in a covalent compound gets the suffix ide	true
Having polar bonds may make a covalent compound polar. A polar compound is one in which there is a slight difference in charge between opposite ends of the molecule. All polar compounds contain polar bonds. But having polar bonds does not necessarily result in a polar compound. It depends on how the atoms are arranged. This is illustrated in Figure 7.11. Both molecules in the figure contain polar bonds, but only formaldehyde is a polar compound. Why is carbon dioxide nonpolar? The molecules of polar compounds are attracted to each other. You can see this in Figure 7.12 for water. A bond forms between the positive hydrogen end of one water molecule and the negative oxygen end of another water molecule. This type of bond is called a hydrogen bond. Hydrogen bonds are weak, but they still must be overcome when a polar substance changes from a solid to a liquid or from a liquid to a gas. As a result, polar covalent compounds may have higher melting and boiling points than nonpolar covalent compounds. To learn more about hydrogen bonding and when it occurs, see the video at this URL:  (0:58). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	polar compounds tend to have higher boiling points than nonpolar compounds	true
A covalent bond is the force of attraction that holds together two atoms that share a pair of electrons. The shared electrons are attracted to the nuclei of both atoms. Covalent bonds form only between atoms of nonmetals. The two atoms may be the same or different elements. If the bonds form between atoms of different elements, a covalent compound forms. Covalent compounds are described in detail later in the lesson. To see a video about covalent bonding, go to this URL:  (6:20). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Figure 7.7 shows an example of a covalent bond forming between two atoms of the same element, in this case two atoms of hydrogen. The two atoms share a pair of electrons. Hydrogen normally occurs in two-atom, or diatomic, molecules like this (di- means "two"). Several other elements also normally occur as diatomic molecules: nitrogen, oxygen, and all but one of the halogens (fluorine, chlorine, bromine, and iodine). 	if a bond forms between calcium and chlorine the bond is covalent	false
A metallic bond is the force of attraction between a positive metal ion and the valence electrons it shares with other ions of the metal. The positive ions form a lattice-like structure. You can see an example in Figure 7.13. (For an animated version, go to the URL below.) The ions are held together in the lattice by bonds with the valence electrons around them. These valence electrons include their own and those of other ions. Why do metallic bonds form? Recall that metals "want" to give up their valence electrons. This means that their valence electrons move freely. The electrons form a "sea" of negative charge surrounding the positive ions. MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	type of ion a metal forms	1.d
A metallic bond is the force of attraction between a positive metal ion and the valence electrons it shares with other ions of the metal. The positive ions form a lattice-like structure. You can see an example in Figure 7.13. (For an animated version, go to the URL below.) The ions are held together in the lattice by bonds with the valence electrons around them. These valence electrons include their own and those of other ions. Why do metallic bonds form? Recall that metals "want" to give up their valence electrons. This means that their valence electrons move freely. The electrons form a "sea" of negative charge surrounding the positive ions. MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	structure formed by metallic bonding	2.g
Metals are useful for many purposes because of their unique properties. However, pure metals may be less useful than mixtures of metals. For example, iron is not as strong as steel, which is a mixture of iron and small amounts of carbon. Steel is so strong that it can hold up huge bridges, like the one Figure 7.15. Steel is also used to make skyscrapers, cargo ships, cars, and trains. Steel is an example of an alloy. An alloy is a mixture of a metal with one or more other elements. The other elements may be metals, nonmetals, or both. An alloy is a solid solution. It is formed by melting a metal and dissolving the other elements in it. The molten solution is then allowed to cool and harden. Several other examples of alloys and their uses are shown in Figure 7.16. You can learn about an amazing alloy called memory wire at the URL below. If you have braces on your teeth, you may even have this alloy in your mouth! 	example of an alloy	3.f
Because of their freely moving electrons, metals are good conductors of electricity. Metals also can be shaped without breaking. They are ductile (can be shaped into wires) and malleable (can be shaped into thin sheets). Metals have these properties because of the nature of their metallic bonds. A metallic lattice, like the one in Figure 7.13, may resemble a rigid ionic crystal. However, it is much more flexible. Look at Figure 7.14. It shows a blacksmith hammering a piece of red-hot iron in order to shape it. Why doesnt the iron shatter, as an ionic crystal would? The ions of the metal can move within the "sea" of electrons without breaking the metallic bonds that hold them together. The ions can shift closer together or farther apart. In this way, the metal can change shape without breaking. You can learn more about metallic bonds and the properties of metals at this URL:  (6:12). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	any element that is a good conductor of electricity	4.c
A metallic bond is the force of attraction between a positive metal ion and the valence electrons it shares with other ions of the metal. The positive ions form a lattice-like structure. You can see an example in Figure 7.13. (For an animated version, go to the URL below.) The ions are held together in the lattice by bonds with the valence electrons around them. These valence electrons include their own and those of other ions. Why do metallic bonds form? Recall that metals "want" to give up their valence electrons. This means that their valence electrons move freely. The electrons form a "sea" of negative charge surrounding the positive ions. MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	a metallic bond may form between a metal and any other element	false
A metallic bond is the force of attraction between a positive metal ion and the valence electrons it shares with other ions of the metal. The positive ions form a lattice-like structure. You can see an example in Figure 7.13. (For an animated version, go to the URL below.) The ions are held together in the lattice by bonds with the valence electrons around them. These valence electrons include their own and those of other ions. Why do metallic bonds form? Recall that metals "want" to give up their valence electrons. This means that their valence electrons move freely. The electrons form a "sea" of negative charge surrounding the positive ions. MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	example of a metal	5.e
Because of their freely moving electrons, metals are good conductors of electricity. Metals also can be shaped without breaking. They are ductile (can be shaped into wires) and malleable (can be shaped into thin sheets). Metals have these properties because of the nature of their metallic bonds. A metallic lattice, like the one in Figure 7.13, may resemble a rigid ionic crystal. However, it is much more flexible. Look at Figure 7.14. It shows a blacksmith hammering a piece of red-hot iron in order to shape it. Why doesnt the iron shatter, as an ionic crystal would? The ions of the metal can move within the "sea" of electrons without breaking the metallic bonds that hold them together. The ions can shift closer together or farther apart. In this way, the metal can change shape without breaking. You can learn more about metallic bonds and the properties of metals at this URL:  (6:12). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	metals can be shaped into thin sheets	true
Metals are useful for many purposes because of their unique properties. However, pure metals may be less useful than mixtures of metals. For example, iron is not as strong as steel, which is a mixture of iron and small amounts of carbon. Steel is so strong that it can hold up huge bridges, like the one Figure 7.15. Steel is also used to make skyscrapers, cargo ships, cars, and trains. Steel is an example of an alloy. An alloy is a mixture of a metal with one or more other elements. The other elements may be metals, nonmetals, or both. An alloy is a solid solution. It is formed by melting a metal and dissolving the other elements in it. The molten solution is then allowed to cool and harden. Several other examples of alloys and their uses are shown in Figure 7.16. You can learn about an amazing alloy called memory wire at the URL below. If you have braces on your teeth, you may even have this alloy in your mouth! 	mixture of a metal with one or more other elements	6.a
A metallic bond is the force of attraction between a positive metal ion and the valence electrons it shares with other ions of the metal. The positive ions form a lattice-like structure. You can see an example in Figure 7.13. (For an animated version, go to the URL below.) The ions are held together in the lattice by bonds with the valence electrons around them. These valence electrons include their own and those of other ions. Why do metallic bonds form? Recall that metals "want" to give up their valence electrons. This means that their valence electrons move freely. The electrons form a "sea" of negative charge surrounding the positive ions. MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	metal ions are surrounded by a sea of positive charge	false
A metallic bond is the force of attraction between a positive metal ion and the valence electrons it shares with other ions of the metal. The positive ions form a lattice-like structure. You can see an example in Figure 7.13. (For an animated version, go to the URL below.) The ions are held together in the lattice by bonds with the valence electrons around them. These valence electrons include their own and those of other ions. Why do metallic bonds form? Recall that metals "want" to give up their valence electrons. This means that their valence electrons move freely. The electrons form a "sea" of negative charge surrounding the positive ions. MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	force of attraction between a metal ion and valence electrons it shares with other ions of the metal	7.b
A metallic bond is the force of attraction between a positive metal ion and the valence electrons it shares with other ions of the metal. The positive ions form a lattice-like structure. You can see an example in Figure 7.13. (For an animated version, go to the URL below.) The ions are held together in the lattice by bonds with the valence electrons around them. These valence electrons include their own and those of other ions. Why do metallic bonds form? Recall that metals "want" to give up their valence electrons. This means that their valence electrons move freely. The electrons form a "sea" of negative charge surrounding the positive ions. MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	special bonds form in metals that do not form in other classes of elements	true
A metallic bond is the force of attraction between a positive metal ion and the valence electrons it shares with other ions of the metal. The positive ions form a lattice-like structure. You can see an example in Figure 7.13. (For an animated version, go to the URL below.) The ions are held together in the lattice by bonds with the valence electrons around them. These valence electrons include their own and those of other ions. Why do metallic bonds form? Recall that metals "want" to give up their valence electrons. This means that their valence electrons move freely. The electrons form a "sea" of negative charge surrounding the positive ions. MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	bronze has been used for thousands of years	true
Metals are useful for many purposes because of their unique properties. However, pure metals may be less useful than mixtures of metals. For example, iron is not as strong as steel, which is a mixture of iron and small amounts of carbon. Steel is so strong that it can hold up huge bridges, like the one Figure 7.15. Steel is also used to make skyscrapers, cargo ships, cars, and trains. Steel is an example of an alloy. An alloy is a mixture of a metal with one or more other elements. The other elements may be metals, nonmetals, or both. An alloy is a solid solution. It is formed by melting a metal and dissolving the other elements in it. The molten solution is then allowed to cool and harden. Several other examples of alloys and their uses are shown in Figure 7.16. You can learn about an amazing alloy called memory wire at the URL below. If you have braces on your teeth, you may even have this alloy in your mouth! 	brass is an alloy of iron and copper	false
Because of their freely moving electrons, metals are good conductors of electricity. Metals also can be shaped without breaking. They are ductile (can be shaped into wires) and malleable (can be shaped into thin sheets). Metals have these properties because of the nature of their metallic bonds. A metallic lattice, like the one in Figure 7.13, may resemble a rigid ionic crystal. However, it is much more flexible. Look at Figure 7.14. It shows a blacksmith hammering a piece of red-hot iron in order to shape it. Why doesnt the iron shatter, as an ionic crystal would? The ions of the metal can move within the "sea" of electrons without breaking the metallic bonds that hold them together. The ions can shift closer together or farther apart. In this way, the metal can change shape without breaking. You can learn more about metallic bonds and the properties of metals at this URL:  (6:12). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	a metallic lattice is more rigid than an ionic crystal	false
A metallic bond is the force of attraction between a positive metal ion and the valence electrons it shares with other ions of the metal. The positive ions form a lattice-like structure. You can see an example in Figure 7.13. (For an animated version, go to the URL below.) The ions are held together in the lattice by bonds with the valence electrons around them. These valence electrons include their own and those of other ions. Why do metallic bonds form? Recall that metals "want" to give up their valence electrons. This means that their valence electrons move freely. The electrons form a "sea" of negative charge surrounding the positive ions. MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	metallic bonds explain some of the unique properties of metals	true
A metallic bond is the force of attraction between a positive metal ion and the valence electrons it shares with other ions of the metal. The positive ions form a lattice-like structure. You can see an example in Figure 7.13. (For an animated version, go to the URL below.) The ions are held together in the lattice by bonds with the valence electrons around them. These valence electrons include their own and those of other ions. Why do metallic bonds form? Recall that metals "want" to give up their valence electrons. This means that their valence electrons move freely. The electrons form a "sea" of negative charge surrounding the positive ions. MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	metal ions form bonds with the valence electrons around them	true
Metals are useful for many purposes because of their unique properties. However, pure metals may be less useful than mixtures of metals. For example, iron is not as strong as steel, which is a mixture of iron and small amounts of carbon. Steel is so strong that it can hold up huge bridges, like the one Figure 7.15. Steel is also used to make skyscrapers, cargo ships, cars, and trains. Steel is an example of an alloy. An alloy is a mixture of a metal with one or more other elements. The other elements may be metals, nonmetals, or both. An alloy is a solid solution. It is formed by melting a metal and dissolving the other elements in it. The molten solution is then allowed to cool and harden. Several other examples of alloys and their uses are shown in Figure 7.16. You can learn about an amazing alloy called memory wire at the URL below. If you have braces on your teeth, you may even have this alloy in your mouth! 	examples of metals include iron zinc and carbon	false
A metallic bond is the force of attraction between a positive metal ion and the valence electrons it shares with other ions of the metal. The positive ions form a lattice-like structure. You can see an example in Figure 7.13. (For an animated version, go to the URL below.) The ions are held together in the lattice by bonds with the valence electrons around them. These valence electrons include their own and those of other ions. Why do metallic bonds form? Recall that metals "want" to give up their valence electrons. This means that their valence electrons move freely. The electrons form a "sea" of negative charge surrounding the positive ions. MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	a metallic lattice is held together by ionic bonds	false
Metals are useful for many purposes because of their unique properties. However, pure metals may be less useful than mixtures of metals. For example, iron is not as strong as steel, which is a mixture of iron and small amounts of carbon. Steel is so strong that it can hold up huge bridges, like the one Figure 7.15. Steel is also used to make skyscrapers, cargo ships, cars, and trains. Steel is an example of an alloy. An alloy is a mixture of a metal with one or more other elements. The other elements may be metals, nonmetals, or both. An alloy is a solid solution. It is formed by melting a metal and dissolving the other elements in it. The molten solution is then allowed to cool and harden. Several other examples of alloys and their uses are shown in Figure 7.16. You can learn about an amazing alloy called memory wire at the URL below. If you have braces on your teeth, you may even have this alloy in your mouth! 	iron is stronger than steel	false
Metals are useful for many purposes because of their unique properties. However, pure metals may be less useful than mixtures of metals. For example, iron is not as strong as steel, which is a mixture of iron and small amounts of carbon. Steel is so strong that it can hold up huge bridges, like the one Figure 7.15. Steel is also used to make skyscrapers, cargo ships, cars, and trains. Steel is an example of an alloy. An alloy is a mixture of a metal with one or more other elements. The other elements may be metals, nonmetals, or both. An alloy is a solid solution. It is formed by melting a metal and dissolving the other elements in it. The molten solution is then allowed to cool and harden. Several other examples of alloys and their uses are shown in Figure 7.16. You can learn about an amazing alloy called memory wire at the URL below. If you have braces on your teeth, you may even have this alloy in your mouth! 	most metal objects are made of alloys	true
A metallic bond is the force of attraction between a positive metal ion and the valence electrons it shares with other ions of the metal. The positive ions form a lattice-like structure. You can see an example in Figure 7.13. (For an animated version, go to the URL below.) The ions are held together in the lattice by bonds with the valence electrons around them. These valence electrons include their own and those of other ions. Why do metallic bonds form? Recall that metals "want" to give up their valence electrons. This means that their valence electrons move freely. The electrons form a "sea" of negative charge surrounding the positive ions. MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	bronze is a compound of copper and tin	false
Metals are useful for many purposes because of their unique properties. However, pure metals may be less useful than mixtures of metals. For example, iron is not as strong as steel, which is a mixture of iron and small amounts of carbon. Steel is so strong that it can hold up huge bridges, like the one Figure 7.15. Steel is also used to make skyscrapers, cargo ships, cars, and trains. Steel is an example of an alloy. An alloy is a mixture of a metal with one or more other elements. The other elements may be metals, nonmetals, or both. An alloy is a solid solution. It is formed by melting a metal and dissolving the other elements in it. The molten solution is then allowed to cool and harden. Several other examples of alloys and their uses are shown in Figure 7.16. You can learn about an amazing alloy called memory wire at the URL below. If you have braces on your teeth, you may even have this alloy in your mouth! 	gold jewelry is usually made of pure gold	false
In chemical reactions, bonds break in the reactants and new bonds form in the products. The reactants and prod- ucts contain the same atoms, but they are rearranged during the reaction. As a result, the atoms are in different combinations in the products than they were in the reactants. Look at the example in Figure 8.2. It shows how water forms. Bonds break in molecules of hydrogen and oxygen. Then new bonds form in molecules of water. In both reactants and products, there are four hydrogen atoms and two oxygen atoms. But the atoms are combined differently in water. You can see another example at this URL: http://w 	most chemical reactions take place in labs	false
Not all changes in matter involve chemical reactions. For example, there are no chemical reactions involved in changes of state. When liquid water freezes or evaporates, it is still water. No bonds are broken and no new products are formed. How can you tell whether a change in matter involves a chemical reaction? Often, there is evidence. Four common signs that a chemical reaction has occurred are: Change in color: the products are a different color than the reactants. Change in temperature: heat is released or absorbed during the reaction. Production of a gas: gas bubbles are released during the reaction. Production of a solid: a solid settles out of a liquid solution. The solid is called a precipitate. You can see examples of each type of evidence in Figure 8.3 and at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	all changes in matter involve chemical reactions	false
In chemical reactions, bonds break in the reactants and new bonds form in the products. The reactants and prod- ucts contain the same atoms, but they are rearranged during the reaction. As a result, the atoms are in different combinations in the products than they were in the reactants. Look at the example in Figure 8.2. It shows how water forms. Bonds break in molecules of hydrogen and oxygen. Then new bonds form in molecules of water. In both reactants and products, there are four hydrogen atoms and two oxygen atoms. But the atoms are combined differently in water. You can see another example at this URL: http://w 	evaporation is an example of a chemical change	false
A chemical reaction is a process in which some substances change into different substances. Substances that start a chemical reaction are called reactants. Substances that are produced in the reaction are called products. Reactants and products can be elements or compounds. A chemical reaction can be represented by this general equation: Reactants ! Products The arrow (!) shows the direction in which the reaction occurs. The reaction may occur quickly or slowly. For example, foam shoots out of a fire extinguisher as soon as the lever is pressed. But it might take years for metal to rust. 	reactants and products can be elements or compounds	true
A chemical reaction is a process in which some substances change into different substances. Substances that start a chemical reaction are called reactants. Substances that are produced in the reaction are called products. Reactants and products can be elements or compounds. A chemical reaction can be represented by this general equation: Reactants ! Products The arrow (!) shows the direction in which the reaction occurs. The reaction may occur quickly or slowly. For example, foam shoots out of a fire extinguisher as soon as the lever is pressed. But it might take years for metal to rust. 	chemical reactions may occur quickly or slowly	true
The arrow in Figure 8.2 shows that the reaction goes from left to right, from hydrogen and oxygen to water. The reaction can also go in the reverse direction. If an electric current passes through water, water molecules break down into molecules of hydrogen and oxygen. This reaction would be represented by a right-to-left arrow ( ) in Figure Many other reactions can also go in both forward and reverse directions. Often, a point is reached at which the forward and reverse reactions occur at the same rate. When this happens, there is no overall change in the amount of reactants and products. This point is called equilibrium, which refers to a balance between any opposing changes. You can see an animation of a chemical reaction reaching equilibrium at this URL: 	some chemical reactions can proceed in just one direction	true
In chemical reactions, bonds break in the reactants and new bonds form in the products. The reactants and prod- ucts contain the same atoms, but they are rearranged during the reaction. As a result, the atoms are in different combinations in the products than they were in the reactants. Look at the example in Figure 8.2. It shows how water forms. Bonds break in molecules of hydrogen and oxygen. Then new bonds form in molecules of water. In both reactants and products, there are four hydrogen atoms and two oxygen atoms. But the atoms are combined differently in water. You can see another example at this URL: http://w 	an example of a chemical change is water boiling	false
In chemical reactions, bonds break in the reactants and new bonds form in the products. The reactants and prod- ucts contain the same atoms, but they are rearranged during the reaction. As a result, the atoms are in different combinations in the products than they were in the reactants. Look at the example in Figure 8.2. It shows how water forms. Bonds break in molecules of hydrogen and oxygen. Then new bonds form in molecules of water. In both reactants and products, there are four hydrogen atoms and two oxygen atoms. But the atoms are combined differently in water. You can see another example at this URL: http://w 	freezing involves a chemical reaction	false
In chemical reactions, bonds break in the reactants and new bonds form in the products. The reactants and prod- ucts contain the same atoms, but they are rearranged during the reaction. As a result, the atoms are in different combinations in the products than they were in the reactants. Look at the example in Figure 8.2. It shows how water forms. Bonds break in molecules of hydrogen and oxygen. Then new bonds form in molecules of water. In both reactants and products, there are four hydrogen atoms and two oxygen atoms. But the atoms are combined differently in water. You can see another example at this URL: http://w 	a banana turning brown is a chemical change	true
In chemical reactions, bonds break in the reactants and new bonds form in the products. The reactants and prod- ucts contain the same atoms, but they are rearranged during the reaction. As a result, the atoms are in different combinations in the products than they were in the reactants. Look at the example in Figure 8.2. It shows how water forms. Bonds break in molecules of hydrogen and oxygen. Then new bonds form in molecules of water. In both reactants and products, there are four hydrogen atoms and two oxygen atoms. But the atoms are combined differently in water. You can see another example at this URL: http://w 	wax melting is an example of a chemical reaction	false
In chemical reactions, bonds break in the reactants and new bonds form in the products. The reactants and prod- ucts contain the same atoms, but they are rearranged during the reaction. As a result, the atoms are in different combinations in the products than they were in the reactants. Look at the example in Figure 8.2. It shows how water forms. Bonds break in molecules of hydrogen and oxygen. Then new bonds form in molecules of water. In both reactants and products, there are four hydrogen atoms and two oxygen atoms. But the atoms are combined differently in water. You can see another example at this URL: http://w 	the products and reactants of a chemical reaction have different atoms	false
In chemical reactions, bonds break in the reactants and new bonds form in the products. The reactants and prod- ucts contain the same atoms, but they are rearranged during the reaction. As a result, the atoms are in different combinations in the products than they were in the reactants. Look at the example in Figure 8.2. It shows how water forms. Bonds break in molecules of hydrogen and oxygen. Then new bonds form in molecules of water. In both reactants and products, there are four hydrogen atoms and two oxygen atoms. But the atoms are combined differently in water. You can see another example at this URL: http://w 	all chemical reactions are reversible	false
In chemical reactions, bonds break in the reactants and new bonds form in the products. The reactants and prod- ucts contain the same atoms, but they are rearranged during the reaction. As a result, the atoms are in different combinations in the products than they were in the reactants. Look at the example in Figure 8.2. It shows how water forms. Bonds break in molecules of hydrogen and oxygen. Then new bonds form in molecules of water. In both reactants and products, there are four hydrogen atoms and two oxygen atoms. But the atoms are combined differently in water. You can see another example at this URL: http://w 	rusting is an example of a chemical change	true
In chemical reactions, bonds break in the reactants and new bonds form in the products. The reactants and prod- ucts contain the same atoms, but they are rearranged during the reaction. As a result, the atoms are in different combinations in the products than they were in the reactants. Look at the example in Figure 8.2. It shows how water forms. Bonds break in molecules of hydrogen and oxygen. Then new bonds form in molecules of water. In both reactants and products, there are four hydrogen atoms and two oxygen atoms. But the atoms are combined differently in water. You can see another example at this URL: http://w 	condensation is a type of chemical reaction	false
Not all changes in matter involve chemical reactions. For example, there are no chemical reactions involved in changes of state. When liquid water freezes or evaporates, it is still water. No bonds are broken and no new products are formed. How can you tell whether a change in matter involves a chemical reaction? Often, there is evidence. Four common signs that a chemical reaction has occurred are: Change in color: the products are a different color than the reactants. Change in temperature: heat is released or absorbed during the reaction. Production of a gas: gas bubbles are released during the reaction. Production of a solid: a solid settles out of a liquid solution. The solid is called a precipitate. You can see examples of each type of evidence in Figure 8.3 and at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	a change in temperature is a common sign of a chemical reaction	true
A chemical reaction is a process in which some substances change into different substances. Substances that start a chemical reaction are called reactants. Substances that are produced in the reaction are called products. Reactants and products can be elements or compounds. A chemical reaction can be represented by this general equation: Reactants ! Products The arrow (!) shows the direction in which the reaction occurs. The reaction may occur quickly or slowly. For example, foam shoots out of a fire extinguisher as soon as the lever is pressed. But it might take years for metal to rust. 	substance produced in a chemical reaction	1.e
In chemical reactions, bonds break in the reactants and new bonds form in the products. The reactants and prod- ucts contain the same atoms, but they are rearranged during the reaction. As a result, the atoms are in different combinations in the products than they were in the reactants. Look at the example in Figure 8.2. It shows how water forms. Bonds break in molecules of hydrogen and oxygen. Then new bonds form in molecules of water. In both reactants and products, there are four hydrogen atoms and two oxygen atoms. But the atoms are combined differently in water. You can see another example at this URL: http://w 	force of attraction that breaks and reforms in a chemical reaction	2.d
In chemical reactions, bonds break in the reactants and new bonds form in the products. The reactants and prod- ucts contain the same atoms, but they are rearranged during the reaction. As a result, the atoms are in different combinations in the products than they were in the reactants. Look at the example in Figure 8.2. It shows how water forms. Bonds break in molecules of hydrogen and oxygen. Then new bonds form in molecules of water. In both reactants and products, there are four hydrogen atoms and two oxygen atoms. But the atoms are combined differently in water. You can see another example at this URL: http://w 	substance that starts a chemical reaction	3.g
In chemical reactions, bonds break in the reactants and new bonds form in the products. The reactants and prod- ucts contain the same atoms, but they are rearranged during the reaction. As a result, the atoms are in different combinations in the products than they were in the reactants. Look at the example in Figure 8.2. It shows how water forms. Bonds break in molecules of hydrogen and oxygen. Then new bonds form in molecules of water. In both reactants and products, there are four hydrogen atoms and two oxygen atoms. But the atoms are combined differently in water. You can see another example at this URL: http://w 	example of chemical change	4.f
The arrow in Figure 8.2 shows that the reaction goes from left to right, from hydrogen and oxygen to water. The reaction can also go in the reverse direction. If an electric current passes through water, water molecules break down into molecules of hydrogen and oxygen. This reaction would be represented by a right-to-left arrow ( ) in Figure Many other reactions can also go in both forward and reverse directions. Often, a point is reached at which the forward and reverse reactions occur at the same rate. When this happens, there is no overall change in the amount of reactants and products. This point is called equilibrium, which refers to a balance between any opposing changes. You can see an animation of a chemical reaction reaching equilibrium at this URL: 	balance between opposing changes	5.c
A chemical reaction is a process in which some substances change into different substances. Substances that start a chemical reaction are called reactants. Substances that are produced in the reaction are called products. Reactants and products can be elements or compounds. A chemical reaction can be represented by this general equation: Reactants ! Products The arrow (!) shows the direction in which the reaction occurs. The reaction may occur quickly or slowly. For example, foam shoots out of a fire extinguisher as soon as the lever is pressed. But it might take years for metal to rust. 	process in which some substances become different substances	6.a
A chemical reaction is a process in which some substances change into different substances. Substances that start a chemical reaction are called reactants. Substances that are produced in the reaction are called products. Reactants and products can be elements or compounds. A chemical reaction can be represented by this general equation: Reactants ! Products The arrow (!) shows the direction in which the reaction occurs. The reaction may occur quickly or slowly. For example, foam shoots out of a fire extinguisher as soon as the lever is pressed. But it might take years for metal to rust. 	example of a physical change	7. b
Coefficients are used to balance chemical equations. A coefficient is a number placed in front of a chemical symbol or formula. It shows how many atoms or molecules of the substance are involved in the reaction. For example, two molecules of hydrogen would be written as 2H2 . A coefficient of 1 usually isnt written. Coefficients can be used to balance equation 1 (above) as follows: Equation 2: 2H2 + O2 ! 2H2 O Equation 2 shows that two molecules of hydrogen react with one molecule of oxygen to produce two molecules of water. The two molecules of hydrogen each contain two hydrogen atoms. There are now four hydrogen atoms in both reactants and products. Is equation 2 balanced? Count the oxygen atoms to find out. 	the symbol 2o2 represents two molecules of oxygen	true
Coefficients are used to balance chemical equations. A coefficient is a number placed in front of a chemical symbol or formula. It shows how many atoms or molecules of the substance are involved in the reaction. For example, two molecules of hydrogen would be written as 2H2 . A coefficient of 1 usually isnt written. Coefficients can be used to balance equation 1 (above) as follows: Equation 2: 2H2 + O2 ! 2H2 O Equation 2 shows that two molecules of hydrogen react with one molecule of oxygen to produce two molecules of water. The two molecules of hydrogen each contain two hydrogen atoms. There are now four hydrogen atoms in both reactants and products. Is equation 2 balanced? Count the oxygen atoms to find out. 	a coefficient of 1 usually is not written	true
Some chemical equations are more challenging to write. Consider the reaction in which hydrogen (H2 ) and oxygen (O2 ) combine to form water (H2 O). Hydrogen and oxygen are the reactants, and water is the product. To write a chemical equation for this reaction, you would start by writing symbols for the reactants and products: Equation 1: H2 + O2 ! H2 O Like equations in math, equations in chemistry must balance. There must be the same number of each type of atom in the products as there is in the reactants. In equation 1, count the number of hydrogen and oxygen atoms on each side of the arrow. There are two hydrogen atoms in both reactants and products. There are two oxygen atoms in the reactants but only one in the product. Therefore, equation 1 is not balanced. 	subscripts are used to balance chemical equations	false
Some chemical equations are more challenging to write. Consider the reaction in which hydrogen (H2 ) and oxygen (O2 ) combine to form water (H2 O). Hydrogen and oxygen are the reactants, and water is the product. To write a chemical equation for this reaction, you would start by writing symbols for the reactants and products: Equation 1: H2 + O2 ! H2 O Like equations in math, equations in chemistry must balance. There must be the same number of each type of atom in the products as there is in the reactants. In equation 1, count the number of hydrogen and oxygen atoms on each side of the arrow. There are two hydrogen atoms in both reactants and products. There are two oxygen atoms in the reactants but only one in the product. Therefore, equation 1 is not balanced. 	the general form of a chemical equation is reactants  products	false
Some chemical equations are more challenging to write. Consider the reaction in which hydrogen (H2 ) and oxygen (O2 ) combine to form water (H2 O). Hydrogen and oxygen are the reactants, and water is the product. To write a chemical equation for this reaction, you would start by writing symbols for the reactants and products: Equation 1: H2 + O2 ! H2 O Like equations in math, equations in chemistry must balance. There must be the same number of each type of atom in the products as there is in the reactants. In equation 1, count the number of hydrogen and oxygen atoms on each side of the arrow. There are two hydrogen atoms in both reactants and products. There are two oxygen atoms in the reactants but only one in the product. Therefore, equation 1 is not balanced. 	the first step in balancing a chemical equation is counting atoms	true
Some chemical equations are more challenging to write. Consider the reaction in which hydrogen (H2 ) and oxygen (O2 ) combine to form water (H2 O). Hydrogen and oxygen are the reactants, and water is the product. To write a chemical equation for this reaction, you would start by writing symbols for the reactants and products: Equation 1: H2 + O2 ! H2 O Like equations in math, equations in chemistry must balance. There must be the same number of each type of atom in the products as there is in the reactants. In equation 1, count the number of hydrogen and oxygen atoms on each side of the arrow. There are two hydrogen atoms in both reactants and products. There are two oxygen atoms in the reactants but only one in the product. Therefore, equation 1 is not balanced. 	a chemical equation must balance only when the reaction reversible	false
Coefficients are used to balance chemical equations. A coefficient is a number placed in front of a chemical symbol or formula. It shows how many atoms or molecules of the substance are involved in the reaction. For example, two molecules of hydrogen would be written as 2H2 . A coefficient of 1 usually isnt written. Coefficients can be used to balance equation 1 (above) as follows: Equation 2: 2H2 + O2 ! 2H2 O Equation 2 shows that two molecules of hydrogen react with one molecule of oxygen to produce two molecules of water. The two molecules of hydrogen each contain two hydrogen atoms. There are now four hydrogen atoms in both reactants and products. Is equation 2 balanced? Count the oxygen atoms to find out. 	the symbol co2 represents two molecules of carbon monoxide	false
Coefficients are used to balance chemical equations. A coefficient is a number placed in front of a chemical symbol or formula. It shows how many atoms or molecules of the substance are involved in the reaction. For example, two molecules of hydrogen would be written as 2H2 . A coefficient of 1 usually isnt written. Coefficients can be used to balance equation 1 (above) as follows: Equation 2: 2H2 + O2 ! 2H2 O Equation 2 shows that two molecules of hydrogen react with one molecule of oxygen to produce two molecules of water. The two molecules of hydrogen each contain two hydrogen atoms. There are now four hydrogen atoms in both reactants and products. Is equation 2 balanced? Count the oxygen atoms to find out. 	the symbol 2h2 represents two atoms of hydrogen	false
Coefficients are used to balance chemical equations. A coefficient is a number placed in front of a chemical symbol or formula. It shows how many atoms or molecules of the substance are involved in the reaction. For example, two molecules of hydrogen would be written as 2H2 . A coefficient of 1 usually isnt written. Coefficients can be used to balance equation 1 (above) as follows: Equation 2: 2H2 + O2 ! 2H2 O Equation 2 shows that two molecules of hydrogen react with one molecule of oxygen to produce two molecules of water. The two molecules of hydrogen each contain two hydrogen atoms. There are now four hydrogen atoms in both reactants and products. Is equation 2 balanced? Count the oxygen atoms to find out. 	coefficients are used to balance chemical equations	true
Some chemical equations are more challenging to write. Consider the reaction in which hydrogen (H2 ) and oxygen (O2 ) combine to form water (H2 O). Hydrogen and oxygen are the reactants, and water is the product. To write a chemical equation for this reaction, you would start by writing symbols for the reactants and products: Equation 1: H2 + O2 ! H2 O Like equations in math, equations in chemistry must balance. There must be the same number of each type of atom in the products as there is in the reactants. In equation 1, count the number of hydrogen and oxygen atoms on each side of the arrow. There are two hydrogen atoms in both reactants and products. There are two oxygen atoms in the reactants but only one in the product. Therefore, equation 1 is not balanced. 	in balancing chemical equations you should use the smallest subscripts possible	false
Some chemical equations are more challenging to write. Consider the reaction in which hydrogen (H2 ) and oxygen (O2 ) combine to form water (H2 O). Hydrogen and oxygen are the reactants, and water is the product. To write a chemical equation for this reaction, you would start by writing symbols for the reactants and products: Equation 1: H2 + O2 ! H2 O Like equations in math, equations in chemistry must balance. There must be the same number of each type of atom in the products as there is in the reactants. In equation 1, count the number of hydrogen and oxygen atoms on each side of the arrow. There are two hydrogen atoms in both reactants and products. There are two oxygen atoms in the reactants but only one in the product. Therefore, equation 1 is not balanced. 	the number of each type of molecule must be the same on both sides of a chemical equation	false
Coefficients are used to balance chemical equations. A coefficient is a number placed in front of a chemical symbol or formula. It shows how many atoms or molecules of the substance are involved in the reaction. For example, two molecules of hydrogen would be written as 2H2 . A coefficient of 1 usually isnt written. Coefficients can be used to balance equation 1 (above) as follows: Equation 2: 2H2 + O2 ! 2H2 O Equation 2 shows that two molecules of hydrogen react with one molecule of oxygen to produce two molecules of water. The two molecules of hydrogen each contain two hydrogen atoms. There are now four hydrogen atoms in both reactants and products. Is equation 2 balanced? Count the oxygen atoms to find out. 	changing coefficients changes the substances involved in a chemical reaction	false
A chemical equation is a symbolic representation of a chemical reaction. It is a shorthand way of showing how atoms are rearranged in the reaction. The general form of a chemical equation was introduced in this chapters lesson "Introduction to Chemical Reactions." It is: Reactants ! Products Consider the simple example in Figure 8.4. When carbon (C) reacts with oxygen (O2 ), it produces carbon dioxide (CO2 ). The chemical equation for this reaction is: C + O2 ! CO2 The reactants are one atom of carbon and one molecule of oxygen. When there is more than one reactant, they are separated by plus signs (+). The product is one molecule of carbon dioxide. If more than one product were produced, plus signs would be used between them as well. 	chemists use a standard method to represent chemical reactions	true
Some chemical equations are more challenging to write. Consider the reaction in which hydrogen (H2 ) and oxygen (O2 ) combine to form water (H2 O). Hydrogen and oxygen are the reactants, and water is the product. To write a chemical equation for this reaction, you would start by writing symbols for the reactants and products: Equation 1: H2 + O2 ! H2 O Like equations in math, equations in chemistry must balance. There must be the same number of each type of atom in the products as there is in the reactants. In equation 1, count the number of hydrogen and oxygen atoms on each side of the arrow. There are two hydrogen atoms in both reactants and products. There are two oxygen atoms in the reactants but only one in the product. Therefore, equation 1 is not balanced. 	the chemical equation h2 co3  h2 o  co2 is balanced	true
Some chemical equations are more challenging to write. Consider the reaction in which hydrogen (H2 ) and oxygen (O2 ) combine to form water (H2 O). Hydrogen and oxygen are the reactants, and water is the product. To write a chemical equation for this reaction, you would start by writing symbols for the reactants and products: Equation 1: H2 + O2 ! H2 O Like equations in math, equations in chemistry must balance. There must be the same number of each type of atom in the products as there is in the reactants. In equation 1, count the number of hydrogen and oxygen atoms on each side of the arrow. There are two hydrogen atoms in both reactants and products. There are two oxygen atoms in the reactants but only one in the product. Therefore, equation 1 is not balanced. 	water is the reactant in the chemical equation h2 o  h2  o2 	true
A chemical equation is a symbolic representation of a chemical reaction. It is a shorthand way of showing how atoms are rearranged in the reaction. The general form of a chemical equation was introduced in this chapters lesson "Introduction to Chemical Reactions." It is: Reactants ! Products Consider the simple example in Figure 8.4. When carbon (C) reacts with oxygen (O2 ), it produces carbon dioxide (CO2 ). The chemical equation for this reaction is: C + O2 ! CO2 The reactants are one atom of carbon and one molecule of oxygen. When there is more than one reactant, they are separated by plus signs (+). The product is one molecule of carbon dioxide. If more than one product were produced, plus signs would be used between them as well. 	symbolic representation of a chemical reaction	1.d
Coefficients are used to balance chemical equations. A coefficient is a number placed in front of a chemical symbol or formula. It shows how many atoms or molecules of the substance are involved in the reaction. For example, two molecules of hydrogen would be written as 2H2 . A coefficient of 1 usually isnt written. Coefficients can be used to balance equation 1 (above) as follows: Equation 2: 2H2 + O2 ! 2H2 O Equation 2 shows that two molecules of hydrogen react with one molecule of oxygen to produce two molecules of water. The two molecules of hydrogen each contain two hydrogen atoms. There are now four hydrogen atoms in both reactants and products. Is equation 2 balanced? Count the oxygen atoms to find out. 	example of a coefficient	2.e
Coefficients are used to balance chemical equations. A coefficient is a number placed in front of a chemical symbol or formula. It shows how many atoms or molecules of the substance are involved in the reaction. For example, two molecules of hydrogen would be written as 2H2 . A coefficient of 1 usually isnt written. Coefficients can be used to balance equation 1 (above) as follows: Equation 2: 2H2 + O2 ! 2H2 O Equation 2 shows that two molecules of hydrogen react with one molecule of oxygen to produce two molecules of water. The two molecules of hydrogen each contain two hydrogen atoms. There are now four hydrogen atoms in both reactants and products. Is equation 2 balanced? Count the oxygen atoms to find out. 	symbol of a chemical compound	3.g
A chemical equation is a symbolic representation of a chemical reaction. It is a shorthand way of showing how atoms are rearranged in the reaction. The general form of a chemical equation was introduced in this chapters lesson "Introduction to Chemical Reactions." It is: Reactants ! Products Consider the simple example in Figure 8.4. When carbon (C) reacts with oxygen (O2 ), it produces carbon dioxide (CO2 ). The chemical equation for this reaction is: C + O2 ! CO2 The reactants are one atom of carbon and one molecule of oxygen. When there is more than one reactant, they are separated by plus signs (+). The product is one molecule of carbon dioxide. If more than one product were produced, plus signs would be used between them as well. 	example of a subscript	4.c
Coefficients are used to balance chemical equations. A coefficient is a number placed in front of a chemical symbol or formula. It shows how many atoms or molecules of the substance are involved in the reaction. For example, two molecules of hydrogen would be written as 2H2 . A coefficient of 1 usually isnt written. Coefficients can be used to balance equation 1 (above) as follows: Equation 2: 2H2 + O2 ! 2H2 O Equation 2 shows that two molecules of hydrogen react with one molecule of oxygen to produce two molecules of water. The two molecules of hydrogen each contain two hydrogen atoms. There are now four hydrogen atoms in both reactants and products. Is equation 2 balanced? Count the oxygen atoms to find out. 	number showing how many atoms or molecules of a given element or compound are involved in a chemical	5.b
Coefficients are used to balance chemical equations. A coefficient is a number placed in front of a chemical symbol or formula. It shows how many atoms or molecules of the substance are involved in the reaction. For example, two molecules of hydrogen would be written as 2H2 . A coefficient of 1 usually isnt written. Coefficients can be used to balance equation 1 (above) as follows: Equation 2: 2H2 + O2 ! 2H2 O Equation 2 shows that two molecules of hydrogen react with one molecule of oxygen to produce two molecules of water. The two molecules of hydrogen each contain two hydrogen atoms. There are now four hydrogen atoms in both reactants and products. Is equation 2 balanced? Count the oxygen atoms to find out. 	symbol of an chemical element	6.a
A chemical equation is a symbolic representation of a chemical reaction. It is a shorthand way of showing how atoms are rearranged in the reaction. The general form of a chemical equation was introduced in this chapters lesson "Introduction to Chemical Reactions." It is: Reactants ! Products Consider the simple example in Figure 8.4. When carbon (C) reacts with oxygen (O2 ), it produces carbon dioxide (CO2 ). The chemical equation for this reaction is: C + O2 ! CO2 The reactants are one atom of carbon and one molecule of oxygen. When there is more than one reactant, they are separated by plus signs (+). The product is one molecule of carbon dioxide. If more than one product were produced, plus signs would be used between them as well. 	number showing how many atoms of a given element are in a molecule	7.f
A decomposition reaction is the reverse of a synthesis reaction. In a decomposition reaction, one reactant breaks down into two or more products. This can be represented by the general equation: AB ! A + B Two examples of decomposition reactions are described below. You can see other examples at this URL: http://w 	one reactant breaking down into two or more products	1.c
Replacement reactions involve ions. They occur when ions switch places in compounds. There are two types of replacement reactions: single and double. Both types are described below. 	ions changing places in two compounds	2.e
A synthesis reaction occurs when two or more reactants combine to form a single product. A synthesis reaction can be represented by the general equation: A+B !C In this general equation (and others like it in this lesson), the letters A, B,C, and so on represent atoms or ions of elements. The arrow shows the direction of the reaction. The letters on the left side of the arrow are the reactants that begin the chemical reaction. The letters on the right side of the arrow are the product of the reaction. Two examples of synthesis reactions are described below. You can see more examples at this URL: 	two reactants combining to form a single product	3.a
A combustion reaction occurs when a substance reacts quickly with oxygen (O2 ). You can see an example of a combustion reaction in Figure 8.10. Combustion is commonly called burning. The substance that burns is usually referred to as fuel. The products of a combustion reaction include carbon dioxide (CO2 ) and water (H2 O). The reaction typically gives off heat and light as well. The general equation for a combustion reaction can be represented by: Fuel + O2 ! CO2 + H2 O 	substance reacting quickly with oxygen	4.b
A synthesis reaction occurs when two or more reactants combine to form a single product. A synthesis reaction can be represented by the general equation: A+B !C In this general equation (and others like it in this lesson), the letters A, B,C, and so on represent atoms or ions of elements. The arrow shows the direction of the reaction. The letters on the left side of the arrow are the reactants that begin the chemical reaction. The letters on the right side of the arrow are the product of the reaction. Two examples of synthesis reactions are described below. You can see more examples at this URL: 	one of the reactants in a combustion reaction	5.g
A single replacement reaction occurs when one ion takes the place of another in a single compound. This type of reaction has the general equation: A + BC ! B + AC Do you see how A has replaced B in the compound? The compound BC has become the compound AC. An example of a single replacement reaction occurs when potassium (K) reacts with water (H2 O). A colorless solid called potassium hydroxide (KOH) forms, and hydrogen gas (H2 ) is released. The equation for the reaction is: 2K + 2H2 O ! 2KOH + H2 Potassium is a highly reactive group 1 alkali metal, so its reaction with water is explosive. You can actually watch this reaction occurring at: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Potassium_water_20.theora.ogv . 	one ion taking the place of another in a compound	6.d
A combustion reaction occurs when a substance reacts quickly with oxygen (O2 ). You can see an example of a combustion reaction in Figure 8.10. Combustion is commonly called burning. The substance that burns is usually referred to as fuel. The products of a combustion reaction include carbon dioxide (CO2 ) and water (H2 O). The reaction typically gives off heat and light as well. The general equation for a combustion reaction can be represented by: Fuel + O2 ! CO2 + H2 O 	another term for a combustion reaction	7.f
A synthesis reaction occurs when two or more reactants combine to form a single product. A synthesis reaction can be represented by the general equation: A+B !C In this general equation (and others like it in this lesson), the letters A, B,C, and so on represent atoms or ions of elements. The arrow shows the direction of the reaction. The letters on the left side of the arrow are the reactants that begin the chemical reaction. The letters on the right side of the arrow are the product of the reaction. Two examples of synthesis reactions are described below. You can see more examples at this URL: 	a synthesis reaction occurs when two or more reactants combine to form a single product	true
A decomposition reaction is the reverse of a synthesis reaction. In a decomposition reaction, one reactant breaks down into two or more products. This can be represented by the general equation: AB ! A + B Two examples of decomposition reactions are described below. You can see other examples at this URL: http://w 	another term for a combustion reaction is decomposition	false
The fuel that burns in a combustion reaction is often a substance called a hydrocarbon. A hydrocarbon is a compound that contains only carbon (C) and hydrogen (H). Fossil fuels, such as natural gas, consist of hydrocarbons. Natural gas is a fuel that is commonly used in home furnaces and gas stoves (see Figure 8.11). The main component of natural gas is the hydrocarbon called methane (CH4 ). The combustion of methane is represented by the equation: CH4 + 2O2 ! CO2 + 2H2 O 	fossil fuels such as oil and natural gas consist of hydrocarbons	true
Your own body cells burn fuel in combustion reactions. The fuel is glucose (C6 H12 O6 ), a simple sugar. The process in which combustion of glucose occurs in body cells is called cellular respiration. This combustion reaction provides energy for life processes. Cellular respiration can be summed up by the equation: C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 ! 6CO2 + 6H2 O Where does glucose come from? It is produced by plants during photosynthesis. In this process, carbon dioxide and water combine to form glucose. Which type of chemical reaction is photosynthesis? 	the fuel that cells use for energy is oxygen	false
Your own body cells burn fuel in combustion reactions. The fuel is glucose (C6 H12 O6 ), a simple sugar. The process in which combustion of glucose occurs in body cells is called cellular respiration. This combustion reaction provides energy for life processes. Cellular respiration can be summed up by the equation: C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 ! 6CO2 + 6H2 O Where does glucose come from? It is produced by plants during photosynthesis. In this process, carbon dioxide and water combine to form glucose. Which type of chemical reaction is photosynthesis? 	plants combine carbon dioxide and water to form glucose	true
Another example of a decomposition reaction is illustrated in Figure 8.9. Water (H2 O) decomposes to hydrogen (H2 ) and oxygen (O2 ) when an electric current passes through it. This reaction is represented by the equation: 2H2 O ! 2H2 + O2 What is the reverse of this decomposition reaction? (Hint: How is water synthesized? You can look at this chapters "Introduction to Chemical Reactions" lesson to find out.) 	water decomposes when an electric current passes through it	true
A combustion reaction occurs when a substance reacts quickly with oxygen (O2 ). You can see an example of a combustion reaction in Figure 8.10. Combustion is commonly called burning. The substance that burns is usually referred to as fuel. The products of a combustion reaction include carbon dioxide (CO2 ) and water (H2 O). The reaction typically gives off heat and light as well. The general equation for a combustion reaction can be represented by: Fuel + O2 ! CO2 + H2 O 	a combustion reaction usually gives off heat and light	true
Your own body cells burn fuel in combustion reactions. The fuel is glucose (C6 H12 O6 ), a simple sugar. The process in which combustion of glucose occurs in body cells is called cellular respiration. This combustion reaction provides energy for life processes. Cellular respiration can be summed up by the equation: C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 ! 6CO2 + 6H2 O Where does glucose come from? It is produced by plants during photosynthesis. In this process, carbon dioxide and water combine to form glucose. Which type of chemical reaction is photosynthesis? 	the burning of glucose in cells is called cellular combustion	false
A decomposition reaction is the reverse of a synthesis reaction. In a decomposition reaction, one reactant breaks down into two or more products. This can be represented by the general equation: AB ! A + B Two examples of decomposition reactions are described below. You can see other examples at this URL: http://w 	sodium chloride forms in a decomposition reaction	false
A decomposition reaction is the reverse of a synthesis reaction. In a decomposition reaction, one reactant breaks down into two or more products. This can be represented by the general equation: AB ! A + B Two examples of decomposition reactions are described below. You can see other examples at this URL: http://w 	methane and oxygen combine in a synthesis reaction	false
A combustion reaction occurs when a substance reacts quickly with oxygen (O2 ). You can see an example of a combustion reaction in Figure 8.10. Combustion is commonly called burning. The substance that burns is usually referred to as fuel. The products of a combustion reaction include carbon dioxide (CO2 ) and water (H2 O). The reaction typically gives off heat and light as well. The general equation for a combustion reaction can be represented by: Fuel + O2 ! CO2 + H2 O 	one product of the reaction in question 5 is carbon dioxide	true
Replacement reactions involve ions. They occur when ions switch places in compounds. There are two types of replacement reactions: single and double. Both types are described below. 	there are two types of decomposition reactions	false
Your own body cells burn fuel in combustion reactions. The fuel is glucose (C6 H12 O6 ), a simple sugar. The process in which combustion of glucose occurs in body cells is called cellular respiration. This combustion reaction provides energy for life processes. Cellular respiration can be summed up by the equation: C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 ! 6CO2 + 6H2 O Where does glucose come from? It is produced by plants during photosynthesis. In this process, carbon dioxide and water combine to form glucose. Which type of chemical reaction is photosynthesis? 	carbon dioxide forms only in combustion reactions	false
A double replacement reaction occurs when two compounds exchange ions. This produces two new compounds. A double replacement reaction can be represented by the general equation: AB +CD ! AD +CB Do you see how B and D have changed places? Both reactant compounds have changed. An example of a double replacement reaction is sodium chloride (NaCl) reacting with silver fluoride (AgF). This reaction is represented by the equation: NaCl + AgF ! NaF + AgCl Cl and F have changed places. Can you name the products of this reaction? 	the general equation ab  cd  ad  cb represents a replacement reaction	true
A single replacement reaction occurs when one ion takes the place of another in a single compound. This type of reaction has the general equation: A + BC ! B + AC Do you see how A has replaced B in the compound? The compound BC has become the compound AC. An example of a single replacement reaction occurs when potassium (K) reacts with water (H2 O). A colorless solid called potassium hydroxide (KOH) forms, and hydrogen gas (H2 ) is released. The equation for the reaction is: 2K + 2H2 O ! 2KOH + H2 Potassium is a highly reactive group 1 alkali metal, so its reaction with water is explosive. You can actually watch this reaction occurring at: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Potassium_water_20.theora.ogv . 	the chemical reaction 2k  2h2 o  2koh  h2 is a replacement reaction	true
Whether a reaction absorbs energy or releases energy, there is no overall change in the amount of energy. Energy cannot be created or destroyed. This is the law of conservation of energy. Energy can change form for example, from electricity to light but the same amount of energy always remains. If energy cannot be destroyed, what happens to the energy that is absorbed in an endothermic reaction? The energy is stored in the chemical bonds of the products. This form of energy is called chemical energy. In an endothermic reaction, the products have more stored chemical energy than the reactants. In an exothermic reaction, the opposite is true. The products have less stored chemical energy than the reactants. The excess energy in the reactants is released to the surroundings when the reaction occurs. The graphs in Figure 8.14 show the chemical energy of reactants and products in each type of reaction. 	energy stored in chemical bonds	1.g
Some reactions need extra help to occur quickly. They need another substance, called a catalyst. A catalyst is a substance that increases the rate of a chemical reaction but is not changed or used up in the reaction. The catalyst can go on to catalyze many more reactions. Catalysts are not reactants, but they help reactants come together so they can react. You can see one way this happens in the animation at the URL below. By helping reactants come together, a catalyst decreases the activation energy needed to start a chemical reaction. This speeds up the reaction. Living things depend on catalysts to speed up many chemical reactions inside their cells. Catalysts in living things are called enzymes. Enzymes may be extremely effective. A reaction that takes a split second to occur with an enzyme might take billions of years without it! 	substance that speeds up chemical reactions	2.b
When the temperature of reactants is higher, the rate of the reaction is faster. At higher temperatures, particles of reactants have more energy, so they move faster. They are more likely to bump into one another and to collide with greater force. For example, when you fry an egg, turning up the heat causes the egg to cook faster. The same principle explains why storing food in a cold refrigerator reduces the rate at which food spoils (see Figure 8.16). Both food frying and food spoiling are chemical reactions that happen faster at higher temperatures. 	turning out heat	3.e
Whether a reaction absorbs energy or releases energy, there is no overall change in the amount of energy. Energy cannot be created or destroyed. This is the law of conservation of energy. Energy can change form for example, from electricity to light but the same amount of energy always remains. If energy cannot be destroyed, what happens to the energy that is absorbed in an endothermic reaction? The energy is stored in the chemical bonds of the products. This form of energy is called chemical energy. In an endothermic reaction, the products have more stored chemical energy than the reactants. In an exothermic reaction, the opposite is true. The products have less stored chemical energy than the reactants. The excess energy in the reactants is released to the surroundings when the reaction occurs. The graphs in Figure 8.14 show the chemical energy of reactants and products in each type of reaction. 	an endothermic chemical reaction is a reaction that releases energy	false
Any factor that helps reactants come together so they can react lowers the amount of activation energy needed to start the reaction. If the activation energy is lowered, more reactant particles can react, and the reaction occurs more quickly. How fast a reaction occurs is called the reaction rate. Factors that affect the reaction rate include: temperature of reactants concentration of reactants surface area of reactants presence of catalysts 	how fast a reaction occurs	4.f
In an exothermic reaction, it takes less energy to break bonds in the reactants than is released when new bonds form in the products. The word "exothermic" literally means "turning out heat." Energy, often in the form of heat, is released as an exothermic reaction occurs. The general equation for an exothermic reaction is: Reactants ! Products + Energy If the energy is released as heat, an exothermic reaction results in a rise in temperature. Thats what happens in the exothermic reaction at the URL below. Combustion reactions are examples of exothermic reactions. When substances burn, they usually give off energy as heat and light. Look at the big bonfire in Figure 8.13. You can see the light energy it is giving off. If you were standing near the fire, you would also feel its heat. 	the general equation for an exothermic reaction is reactants  energy  products	false
Any factor that helps reactants come together so they can react lowers the amount of activation energy needed to start the reaction. If the activation energy is lowered, more reactant particles can react, and the reaction occurs more quickly. How fast a reaction occurs is called the reaction rate. Factors that affect the reaction rate include: temperature of reactants concentration of reactants surface area of reactants presence of catalysts 	energy needed to start a reaction	5.a
When the temperature of reactants is higher, the rate of the reaction is faster. At higher temperatures, particles of reactants have more energy, so they move faster. They are more likely to bump into one another and to collide with greater force. For example, when you fry an egg, turning up the heat causes the egg to cook faster. The same principle explains why storing food in a cold refrigerator reduces the rate at which food spoils (see Figure 8.16). Both food frying and food spoiling are chemical reactions that happen faster at higher temperatures. 	taking in heat	6.d
In an endothermic reaction, it takes more energy to break bonds in the reactants than is released when new bonds form in the products. The word "endothermic" literally means "taking in heat." A constant input of energy, often in the form of heat, is needed in an endothermic reaction. Not enough energy is released when products form to break more bonds in the reactants. Additional energy is needed to keep the reaction going. The general equation for an endothermic reaction is: Reactants + Energy ! Products In many endothermic reactions, heat is absorbed from the surroundings. As a result, the temperature drops. The drop in temperature may be great enough to cause liquid products to freeze. Thats what happens in the endothermic reaction at this URL:  One of the most important endothermic reactions is photosynthesis. In this reaction, plants synthesize glucose (C6 H12 O6 ) from carbon dioxide (CO2 ) and water (H2 O). They also release oxygen (O2 ). The energy for photo- synthesis comes from light (see Figure 8.12). Without light energy, photosynthesis cannot occur. The chemical equation for photosynthesis is: 6CO2 + 6H2 O ! C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 	plants synthesize glucose in an endothermic chemical reaction	true
Concentration is the number of particles of a substance in a given volume. When the concentration of reactants is higher, the reaction rate is faster. At higher concentrations, particles of reactants are crowded closer together, so they are more likely to collide and react. Did you ever see a sign like the one in Figure 8.17? You might see it where someone is using a tank of pure oxygen for a breathing problem. The greater concentration of oxygen in the air makes combustion rapid if a fire starts burning. 	number of particles of a substance in a given volume	7.c
Whether a reaction absorbs energy or releases energy, there is no overall change in the amount of energy. Energy cannot be created or destroyed. This is the law of conservation of energy. Energy can change form for example, from electricity to light but the same amount of energy always remains. If energy cannot be destroyed, what happens to the energy that is absorbed in an endothermic reaction? The energy is stored in the chemical bonds of the products. This form of energy is called chemical energy. In an endothermic reaction, the products have more stored chemical energy than the reactants. In an exothermic reaction, the opposite is true. The products have less stored chemical energy than the reactants. The excess energy in the reactants is released to the surroundings when the reaction occurs. The graphs in Figure 8.14 show the chemical energy of reactants and products in each type of reaction. 	the law of conservation of energy does not apply to chemical reactions	false
Any factor that helps reactants come together so they can react lowers the amount of activation energy needed to start the reaction. If the activation energy is lowered, more reactant particles can react, and the reaction occurs more quickly. How fast a reaction occurs is called the reaction rate. Factors that affect the reaction rate include: temperature of reactants concentration of reactants surface area of reactants presence of catalysts 	any factor that helps reactants come together lowers the activation energy	true
When the temperature of reactants is higher, the rate of the reaction is faster. At higher temperatures, particles of reactants have more energy, so they move faster. They are more likely to bump into one another and to collide with greater force. For example, when you fry an egg, turning up the heat causes the egg to cook faster. The same principle explains why storing food in a cold refrigerator reduces the rate at which food spoils (see Figure 8.16). Both food frying and food spoiling are chemical reactions that happen faster at higher temperatures. 	all chemical reactions involve energy	true
In an endothermic reaction, it takes more energy to break bonds in the reactants than is released when new bonds form in the products. The word "endothermic" literally means "taking in heat." A constant input of energy, often in the form of heat, is needed in an endothermic reaction. Not enough energy is released when products form to break more bonds in the reactants. Additional energy is needed to keep the reaction going. The general equation for an endothermic reaction is: Reactants + Energy ! Products In many endothermic reactions, heat is absorbed from the surroundings. As a result, the temperature drops. The drop in temperature may be great enough to cause liquid products to freeze. Thats what happens in the endothermic reaction at this URL:  One of the most important endothermic reactions is photosynthesis. In this reaction, plants synthesize glucose (C6 H12 O6 ) from carbon dioxide (CO2 ) and water (H2 O). They also release oxygen (O2 ). The energy for photo- synthesis comes from light (see Figure 8.12). Without light energy, photosynthesis cannot occur. The chemical equation for photosynthesis is: 6CO2 + 6H2 O ! C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 	one of the most important endothermic reactions is photosynthesis	true
In an exothermic reaction, it takes less energy to break bonds in the reactants than is released when new bonds form in the products. The word "exothermic" literally means "turning out heat." Energy, often in the form of heat, is released as an exothermic reaction occurs. The general equation for an exothermic reaction is: Reactants ! Products + Energy If the energy is released as heat, an exothermic reaction results in a rise in temperature. Thats what happens in the exothermic reaction at the URL below. Combustion reactions are examples of exothermic reactions. When substances burn, they usually give off energy as heat and light. Look at the big bonfire in Figure 8.13. You can see the light energy it is giving off. If you were standing near the fire, you would also feel its heat. 	in an exothermic reaction it takes more energy to break bonds in reactants than is released when bonds	false
Concentration is the number of particles of a substance in a given volume. When the concentration of reactants is higher, the reaction rate is faster. At higher concentrations, particles of reactants are crowded closer together, so they are more likely to collide and react. Did you ever see a sign like the one in Figure 8.17? You might see it where someone is using a tank of pure oxygen for a breathing problem. The greater concentration of oxygen in the air makes combustion rapid if a fire starts burning. 	combustion is an example of an endothermic reaction	false
Whether a reaction absorbs energy or releases energy, there is no overall change in the amount of energy. Energy cannot be created or destroyed. This is the law of conservation of energy. Energy can change form for example, from electricity to light but the same amount of energy always remains. If energy cannot be destroyed, what happens to the energy that is absorbed in an endothermic reaction? The energy is stored in the chemical bonds of the products. This form of energy is called chemical energy. In an endothermic reaction, the products have more stored chemical energy than the reactants. In an exothermic reaction, the opposite is true. The products have less stored chemical energy than the reactants. The excess energy in the reactants is released to the surroundings when the reaction occurs. The graphs in Figure 8.14 show the chemical energy of reactants and products in each type of reaction. 	there is no overall change in the amount of energy in chemical reactions	true
Whether a reaction absorbs energy or releases energy, there is no overall change in the amount of energy. Energy cannot be created or destroyed. This is the law of conservation of energy. Energy can change form for example, from electricity to light but the same amount of energy always remains. If energy cannot be destroyed, what happens to the energy that is absorbed in an endothermic reaction? The energy is stored in the chemical bonds of the products. This form of energy is called chemical energy. In an endothermic reaction, the products have more stored chemical energy than the reactants. In an exothermic reaction, the opposite is true. The products have less stored chemical energy than the reactants. The excess energy in the reactants is released to the surroundings when the reaction occurs. The graphs in Figure 8.14 show the chemical energy of reactants and products in each type of reaction. 	only endothermic reactions need energy to get started	false
Whether a reaction absorbs energy or releases energy, there is no overall change in the amount of energy. Energy cannot be created or destroyed. This is the law of conservation of energy. Energy can change form for example, from electricity to light but the same amount of energy always remains. If energy cannot be destroyed, what happens to the energy that is absorbed in an endothermic reaction? The energy is stored in the chemical bonds of the products. This form of energy is called chemical energy. In an endothermic reaction, the products have more stored chemical energy than the reactants. In an exothermic reaction, the opposite is true. The products have less stored chemical energy than the reactants. The excess energy in the reactants is released to the surroundings when the reaction occurs. The graphs in Figure 8.14 show the chemical energy of reactants and products in each type of reaction. 	energy is absorbed in exothermic reactions	false
In an exothermic reaction, it takes less energy to break bonds in the reactants than is released when new bonds form in the products. The word "exothermic" literally means "turning out heat." Energy, often in the form of heat, is released as an exothermic reaction occurs. The general equation for an exothermic reaction is: Reactants ! Products + Energy If the energy is released as heat, an exothermic reaction results in a rise in temperature. Thats what happens in the exothermic reaction at the URL below. Combustion reactions are examples of exothermic reactions. When substances burn, they usually give off energy as heat and light. Look at the big bonfire in Figure 8.13. You can see the light energy it is giving off. If you were standing near the fire, you would also feel its heat. 	an increase in temperature is a sign of an exothermic reaction	true
Whether a reaction absorbs energy or releases energy, there is no overall change in the amount of energy. Energy cannot be created or destroyed. This is the law of conservation of energy. Energy can change form for example, from electricity to light but the same amount of energy always remains. If energy cannot be destroyed, what happens to the energy that is absorbed in an endothermic reaction? The energy is stored in the chemical bonds of the products. This form of energy is called chemical energy. In an endothermic reaction, the products have more stored chemical energy than the reactants. In an exothermic reaction, the opposite is true. The products have less stored chemical energy than the reactants. The excess energy in the reactants is released to the surroundings when the reaction occurs. The graphs in Figure 8.14 show the chemical energy of reactants and products in each type of reaction. 	products have less stored chemical energy than reactants in an endothermic reaction	false
Some reactions need extra help to occur quickly. They need another substance, called a catalyst. A catalyst is a substance that increases the rate of a chemical reaction but is not changed or used up in the reaction. The catalyst can go on to catalyze many more reactions. Catalysts are not reactants, but they help reactants come together so they can react. You can see one way this happens in the animation at the URL below. By helping reactants come together, a catalyst decreases the activation energy needed to start a chemical reaction. This speeds up the reaction. Living things depend on catalysts to speed up many chemical reactions inside their cells. Catalysts in living things are called enzymes. Enzymes may be extremely effective. A reaction that takes a split second to occur with an enzyme might take billions of years without it! 	catalysts in living things are called enzymes	true
Because of carbons ability to form so many covalent bonds, it often forms polymers. A polymer is a large molecule that consists of many smaller molecules joined together by covalent bonds. The smaller molecules are called monomers. (The prefix mono means "one," and the prefix poly means "many.") Polymers may consist of just one type of monomer or of more than one type. Polymers are a little like the strings of beads in Figure 9.4. What do the individual beads represent? Many polymers occur naturally. You will read about natural polymers in this chapters "Hydrocarbons" and "Carbon and Living Things" lessons. Other polymers are synthetic. This means that they are produced in labs or factories. Synthetic polymers are created in synthesis reactions in which monomers bond together to form much larger compounds. Plastics are examples of synthetic polymers. The plastic items in Figure 9.5 are all made of polythene (also called polyethylene). It consists of repeating monomers of ethene (C2 H4 ). To learn more about polymers and how they form, go to this URL:  (2:13). 	large molecule that consists of many smaller molecules joined together by covalent bonds	1.b
Carbon can form single, double, or even triple bonds with other carbon atoms. In a single bond, two carbon atoms share one pair of electrons. In a double bond, they share two pairs of electrons, and in a triple bond they share three pairs of electrons. Examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3. 	form of carbon in which carbon atoms are arranged in layers	2.f
Carbon can form single, double, or even triple bonds with other carbon atoms. In a single bond, two carbon atoms share one pair of electrons. In a double bond, they share two pairs of electrons, and in a triple bond they share three pairs of electrons. Examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3. 	one of the simplest carbon compounds	3.e
Carbon can form single, double, or even triple bonds with other carbon atoms. In a single bond, two carbon atoms share one pair of electrons. In a double bond, they share two pairs of electrons, and in a triple bond they share three pairs of electrons. Examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3. 	form of carbon that it is the hardest natural substance	4.d
Carbon is a nonmetal in group 14 of the periodic table. Like other group 14 compounds, carbon has four valence electrons. Valence electrons are the electrons in the outer energy level of an atom that are involved in chemical bonds. The valence electrons of carbon are shown in Figure 9.1. 	carbon is a nonmetal in group 12 of the periodic table	false
Because of carbons ability to form so many covalent bonds, it often forms polymers. A polymer is a large molecule that consists of many smaller molecules joined together by covalent bonds. The smaller molecules are called monomers. (The prefix mono means "one," and the prefix poly means "many.") Polymers may consist of just one type of monomer or of more than one type. Polymers are a little like the strings of beads in Figure 9.4. What do the individual beads represent? Many polymers occur naturally. You will read about natural polymers in this chapters "Hydrocarbons" and "Carbon and Living Things" lessons. Other polymers are synthetic. This means that they are produced in labs or factories. Synthetic polymers are created in synthesis reactions in which monomers bond together to form much larger compounds. Plastics are examples of synthetic polymers. The plastic items in Figure 9.5 are all made of polythene (also called polyethylene). It consists of repeating monomers of ethene (C2 H4 ). To learn more about polymers and how they form, go to this URL:  (2:13). 	small molecule joined with other small molecules by covalent bonds to form a much larger molecule	5.a
Because it has four valence electrons, carbon needs four more electrons to fill its outer energy level. It can achieve this by forming four covalent bonds. Covalent bonds are chemical bonds that form between nonmetals. In a covalent bond, two atoms share a pair of electrons. By forming four covalent bonds, carbon shares four pairs of electrons, thus filling its outer energy level. A carbon atom can form bonds with other carbon atoms or with the atoms of other elements. Carbon often forms bonds with hydrogen. You can see an example in Figure 9.2. The compound represented in the figure is methane (CH4 ). The carbon atom in a methane molecule forms bonds with four hydrogen atoms. The diagram on the left shows all the shared electrons. The diagram on the right represents each pair of shared electrons with a dash (). This type of diagram is called a structural formula. 	a structural formula uses dots to represent electrons	false
Carbon can form single, double, or even triple bonds with other carbon atoms. In a single bond, two carbon atoms share one pair of electrons. In a double bond, they share two pairs of electrons, and in a triple bond they share three pairs of electrons. Examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3. 	form of carbon in which carbon atoms are arranged in hollow spheres	6. g
Because of carbons ability to form so many covalent bonds, it often forms polymers. A polymer is a large molecule that consists of many smaller molecules joined together by covalent bonds. The smaller molecules are called monomers. (The prefix mono means "one," and the prefix poly means "many.") Polymers may consist of just one type of monomer or of more than one type. Polymers are a little like the strings of beads in Figure 9.4. What do the individual beads represent? Many polymers occur naturally. You will read about natural polymers in this chapters "Hydrocarbons" and "Carbon and Living Things" lessons. Other polymers are synthetic. This means that they are produced in labs or factories. Synthetic polymers are created in synthesis reactions in which monomers bond together to form much larger compounds. Plastics are examples of synthetic polymers. The plastic items in Figure 9.5 are all made of polythene (also called polyethylene). It consists of repeating monomers of ethene (C2 H4 ). To learn more about polymers and how they form, go to this URL:  (2:13). 	all carbon polymers are made in labs or factories	false
Carbon can form single, double, or even triple bonds with other carbon atoms. In a single bond, two carbon atoms share one pair of electrons. In a double bond, they share two pairs of electrons, and in a triple bond they share three pairs of electrons. Examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3. 	carbon compound found only in plants	7. c
Pure carbon can exist in different forms, depending on how its atoms are arranged. The forms include diamond, graphite, and fullerenes. All three forms exist as crystals, but they have different structures. Their different structures, in turn, give them different properties. You can learn more about them in Table 9.1. atoms affect the properties of the substances formed? Structure Diamond crystal Description Diamond Diamond is a form of carbon in which each carbon atom is bonded to four other carbon atoms. This forms a strong, rigid, three- dimensional structure. Diamond is the hardest natural substance. It is used for cutting and grinding tools as well as for rings and other pieces of jewelry. Graphite Graphite is a form of carbon in which carbon atoms are arranged in layers. Bonds are strong between carbon atoms within each layer but relatively weak between atoms in different layers. The weak bonds between layers allow the layers to slide over one another. This makes graphite relatively soft and slippery. It is used as a lubricant. It also makes up the "lead" in pencils. Fullerene A fullerene (also called a bucky- ball) is a form of carbon in which carbon atoms are arranged in hol- low spheres. Each carbon atom is bonded to three others by sin- gle covalent bonds. The pattern of atoms resembles the pattern on the surface of a soccer ball. Fullerenes were first discovered in 1985. They have been found in soot and me- teorites. Possible commercial uses of fullerenes are under investiga- tion. To learn how this form of carbon got its funny names, go to this URL:  This metal cutter has a diamond blade. 	graphite is used as a lubricant because it is slippery	true
Carbon can form single, double, or even triple bonds with other carbon atoms. In a single bond, two carbon atoms share one pair of electrons. In a double bond, they share two pairs of electrons, and in a triple bond they share three pairs of electrons. Examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3. 	each molecule of methane contains four atoms of carbon	false
Carbon can form single, double, or even triple bonds with other carbon atoms. In a single bond, two carbon atoms share one pair of electrons. In a double bond, they share two pairs of electrons, and in a triple bond they share three pairs of electrons. Examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3. 	the chief component of cellulose is carbon	true
Carbon can form single, double, or even triple bonds with other carbon atoms. In a single bond, two carbon atoms share one pair of electrons. In a double bond, they share two pairs of electrons, and in a triple bond they share three pairs of electrons. Examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3. 	carbon forms more compounds than any other element	true
Carbon can form single, double, or even triple bonds with other carbon atoms. In a single bond, two carbon atoms share one pair of electrons. In a double bond, they share two pairs of electrons, and in a triple bond they share three pairs of electrons. Examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3. 	carbon can form bonds with any other element except itself	false
Because it has four valence electrons, carbon needs four more electrons to fill its outer energy level. It can achieve this by forming four covalent bonds. Covalent bonds are chemical bonds that form between nonmetals. In a covalent bond, two atoms share a pair of electrons. By forming four covalent bonds, carbon shares four pairs of electrons, thus filling its outer energy level. A carbon atom can form bonds with other carbon atoms or with the atoms of other elements. Carbon often forms bonds with hydrogen. You can see an example in Figure 9.2. The compound represented in the figure is methane (CH4 ). The carbon atom in a methane molecule forms bonds with four hydrogen atoms. The diagram on the left shows all the shared electrons. The diagram on the right represents each pair of shared electrons with a dash (). This type of diagram is called a structural formula. 	the carbon compound with the formula ch4 is polyethylene	false
Carbon can form single, double, or even triple bonds with other carbon atoms. In a single bond, two carbon atoms share one pair of electrons. In a double bond, they share two pairs of electrons, and in a triple bond they share three pairs of electrons. Examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3. 	in a triple bond two atoms share three valence electrons	false
Carbon can form single, double, or even triple bonds with other carbon atoms. In a single bond, two carbon atoms share one pair of electrons. In a double bond, they share two pairs of electrons, and in a triple bond they share three pairs of electrons. Examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3. 	plastics are examples of synthetic carbon polymers	true
Carbon can form single, double, or even triple bonds with other carbon atoms. In a single bond, two carbon atoms share one pair of electrons. In a double bond, they share two pairs of electrons, and in a triple bond they share three pairs of electrons. Examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3. 	all forms of crystalline carbon have the same structure	false
Carbon can form single, double, or even triple bonds with other carbon atoms. In a single bond, two carbon atoms share one pair of electrons. In a double bond, they share two pairs of electrons, and in a triple bond they share three pairs of electrons. Examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3. 	carbon can combine only with hydrogen and oxygen	false
Carbon can form single, double, or even triple bonds with other carbon atoms. In a single bond, two carbon atoms share one pair of electrons. In a double bond, they share two pairs of electrons, and in a triple bond they share three pairs of electrons. Examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3. 	carbon forms ionic bonds with other nonmetals	false
Carbon can form single, double, or even triple bonds with other carbon atoms. In a single bond, two carbon atoms share one pair of electrons. In a double bond, they share two pairs of electrons, and in a triple bond they share three pairs of electrons. Examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3. 	there are millions of known carbon compounds	true
Structural formulas are often used to represent hydrocarbon compounds because the molecules can have different shapes, or structures. Hydrocarbons may form straight chains, branched chains, or rings. Figure 9.8 shows an example of an alkane with each shape. In straight-chain molecules, all the carbon atoms are lined up in a row like cars of a train. They form what is called the backbone of the molecule. In branched-chain molecules, at least one of the carbon atoms branches off to the side from the backbone. In cyclic molecules, the chain of carbon atoms is joined at the two ends to form a ring. 	all hydrocarbons are small chemical compounds	false
Hydrocarbons are compounds that contain only carbon and hydrogen. Hydrocarbons are the simplest type of carbon-based compounds. Nonetheless, they can vary greatly in size. The smallest hydrocarbons have just one or two carbon atoms, but large hydrocarbons may have hundreds. The size of hydrocarbon molecules influences their properties. For example, it influences their boiling and melting points. As a result, some hydrocarbons are gases at room temperature, while others are liquids or solids. Hydrocarbons are generally nonpolar and do not dissolve in water. In fact, they tend to repel water. Thats why they are used in floor wax and similar products. Hydrocarbons can be classified in two basic classes. The classes are saturated hydrocarbons and unsaturated hydrocarbons. This classification is based on the number of bonds between carbon atoms. You can learn more about both types of hydrocarbons at this URL:  (6:41). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	hydrocarbons are generally nonpolar compounds	true
Unsaturated hydrocarbons that contain at least one double bond are called alkenes. The name of a specific alkene always ends in ene, with a prefix indicating the number of carbon atoms. Figure 9.10 shows the structural formula for the smallest alkene. It has just two carbon atoms and is named ethene. Ethene is produced by most fruits and vegetables. It speeds up ripening and also rotting. Figure 9.11 shows the effects of ethene on bananas. Like alkanes, alkenes can have different shapes. They can form straight chains, branched chains, or rings. Alkenes can also form isomers, or compounds with the same atoms but different shapes. Generally, the physical properties of alkenes are similar to those of alkanes. Smaller alkenes, such as ethene, have relatively high boiling and melting points. They are gases at room temperature. Larger alkenes have lower boiling and melting points. They are liquids or waxy solids at room temperature. 	isomers of a given compound always have the same properties	false
Unsaturated hydrocarbons contain at least one double or triple bond between carbon atoms. As a result, the carbon atoms are unable to bond with as many hydrogen atoms as they would if they were joined only by single bonds. This makes them unsaturated with hydrogen. Unsaturated hydrocarbons are classified on the basis of their bonds as alkenes, alkynes, or aromatic hydrocarbons. 	hydrocarbons are compounds that contain only carbon and hydrogen	true
Unsaturated hydrocarbons contain at least one double or triple bond between carbon atoms. As a result, the carbon atoms are unable to bond with as many hydrogen atoms as they would if they were joined only by single bonds. This makes them unsaturated with hydrogen. Unsaturated hydrocarbons are classified on the basis of their bonds as alkenes, alkynes, or aromatic hydrocarbons. 	heptane is an unsaturated hydrocarbon	false
Unsaturated hydrocarbons contain at least one double or triple bond between carbon atoms. As a result, the carbon atoms are unable to bond with as many hydrogen atoms as they would if they were joined only by single bonds. This makes them unsaturated with hydrogen. Unsaturated hydrocarbons are classified on the basis of their bonds as alkenes, alkynes, or aromatic hydrocarbons. 	the simplest hydrocarbons are the aromatic hydrocarbons	false
Ring-shaped alkanes are called cycloalkanes. They usually contain just five or six carbon atoms because larger rings are not very stable. However, rings can join together to create larger molecules consisting of two or more rings. Compared with the straight- and branched-chain alkanes, cycloalkanes have higher boiling and melting points. 	butane has branchedchain molecules	false
Hydrocarbons are compounds that contain only carbon and hydrogen. Hydrocarbons are the simplest type of carbon-based compounds. Nonetheless, they can vary greatly in size. The smallest hydrocarbons have just one or two carbon atoms, but large hydrocarbons may have hundreds. The size of hydrocarbon molecules influences their properties. For example, it influences their boiling and melting points. As a result, some hydrocarbons are gases at room temperature, while others are liquids or solids. Hydrocarbons are generally nonpolar and do not dissolve in water. In fact, they tend to repel water. Thats why they are used in floor wax and similar products. Hydrocarbons can be classified in two basic classes. The classes are saturated hydrocarbons and unsaturated hydrocarbons. This classification is based on the number of bonds between carbon atoms. You can learn more about both types of hydrocarbons at this URL:  (6:41). MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the size of hydrocarbon molecules influences their properties	true
Even compounds with the same number of carbon and hydrogen atoms can have different shapes. These compounds are called isomers. Look at the examples in Figure 9.9. The figure shows the structural formulas of butane and its isomer iso-butane. Both molecules have four carbon atoms and ten hydrogen atoms (C4 H10 ), but the atoms are arranged differently. Butane is a straight-chain molecule. Iso-butane is branched. You can see three-dimensional models of these two isomers at the URLs below. You can rotate the molecule models to get a better idea of their shapes. 	butane and isobutane differ in their number of hydrogen atoms	false
Structural formulas are often used to represent hydrocarbon compounds because the molecules can have different shapes, or structures. Hydrocarbons may form straight chains, branched chains, or rings. Figure 9.8 shows an example of an alkane with each shape. In straight-chain molecules, all the carbon atoms are lined up in a row like cars of a train. They form what is called the backbone of the molecule. In branched-chain molecules, at least one of the carbon atoms branches off to the side from the backbone. In cyclic molecules, the chain of carbon atoms is joined at the two ends to form a ring. 	any hydrocarbon ending in ane has only straightchain molecules	false
Ring-shaped alkanes are called cycloalkanes. They usually contain just five or six carbon atoms because larger rings are not very stable. However, rings can join together to create larger molecules consisting of two or more rings. Compared with the straight- and branched-chain alkanes, cycloalkanes have higher boiling and melting points. 	alkenes may form straight or branchedchains but not rings	false
It is hard to overstate the importance of hydrocarbons to modern life. Hydrocarbons have even been called the driving force of western civilization. You saw some ways they are used in Figure 9.6. Several other ways are illustrated in Figure 9.15. Their most important use is as fuels. Gasoline, natural gas, fuel oil, diesel fuel, jet fuel, coal, kerosene, and propane are just some of the hydrocarbon compounds that are burned for fuel. Hydrocarbons are also used to manufacture many products, including plastics and synthetic fabrics such as polyester. The main source of hydrocarbons is fossil fuels coal, petroleum, and natural gas. Fossil fuels form over hundreds of millions of years when dead organisms are covered with sediments and put under great pressure. Giant ferns in ancient swamps turned into coal deposits. Dead organisms in ancient seas gradually formed deposits of petroleum and natural gas. You can read more about these sources of hydrocarbons in the chapter Introduction to Energy and at the URL below. 	hydrocarbons are used to make synthetic fabrics such as polyester	true
Unsaturated hydrocarbons that contain at least one double bond are called alkenes. The name of a specific alkene always ends in ene, with a prefix indicating the number of carbon atoms. Figure 9.10 shows the structural formula for the smallest alkene. It has just two carbon atoms and is named ethene. Ethene is produced by most fruits and vegetables. It speeds up ripening and also rotting. Figure 9.11 shows the effects of ethene on bananas. Like alkanes, alkenes can have different shapes. They can form straight chains, branched chains, or rings. Alkenes can also form isomers, or compounds with the same atoms but different shapes. Generally, the physical properties of alkenes are similar to those of alkanes. Smaller alkenes, such as ethene, have relatively high boiling and melting points. They are gases at room temperature. Larger alkenes have lower boiling and melting points. They are liquids or waxy solids at room temperature. 	the physical properties of alkenes are generally similar to those of alkanes	true
Unsaturated hydrocarbons that contain at least one triple bond are called alkynes. The name of specific alkynes always end in yne, with a prefix for the number of carbon atoms. Figure 9.12 shows the smallest alkyne, called ethyne, which has just two carbon atoms. Ethyne is also called acetylene. It is burned in acetylene torches, like the one in Figure 9.13. Acetylene produces so much heat when it burns that it can melt metal. Breaking all those bonds between carbon atoms releases a lot of energy. Alkynes may form straight or branched chains. They rarely occur as cycloalkynes. In fact, alkynes of all shapes are relatively rare, at least in nature. 	alkynes are relatively rare in nature	true
It is hard to overstate the importance of hydrocarbons to modern life. Hydrocarbons have even been called the driving force of western civilization. You saw some ways they are used in Figure 9.6. Several other ways are illustrated in Figure 9.15. Their most important use is as fuels. Gasoline, natural gas, fuel oil, diesel fuel, jet fuel, coal, kerosene, and propane are just some of the hydrocarbon compounds that are burned for fuel. Hydrocarbons are also used to manufacture many products, including plastics and synthetic fabrics such as polyester. The main source of hydrocarbons is fossil fuels coal, petroleum, and natural gas. Fossil fuels form over hundreds of millions of years when dead organisms are covered with sediments and put under great pressure. Giant ferns in ancient swamps turned into coal deposits. Dead organisms in ancient seas gradually formed deposits of petroleum and natural gas. You can read more about these sources of hydrocarbons in the chapter Introduction to Energy and at the URL below. 	fossil fuels formed over millions of years from dead organisms	true
Unsaturated hydrocarbons contain at least one double or triple bond between carbon atoms. As a result, the carbon atoms are unable to bond with as many hydrogen atoms as they would if they were joined only by single bonds. This makes them unsaturated with hydrogen. Unsaturated hydrocarbons are classified on the basis of their bonds as alkenes, alkynes, or aromatic hydrocarbons. 	ringshaped unsaturated hydrocarbons	1.f
Unsaturated hydrocarbons contain at least one double or triple bond between carbon atoms. As a result, the carbon atoms are unable to bond with as many hydrogen atoms as they would if they were joined only by single bonds. This makes them unsaturated with hydrogen. Unsaturated hydrocarbons are classified on the basis of their bonds as alkenes, alkynes, or aromatic hydrocarbons. 	all compounds that consist only of carbon and hydrogen	2.d
Unsaturated hydrocarbons contain at least one double or triple bond between carbon atoms. As a result, the carbon atoms are unable to bond with as many hydrogen atoms as they would if they were joined only by single bonds. This makes them unsaturated with hydrogen. Unsaturated hydrocarbons are classified on the basis of their bonds as alkenes, alkynes, or aromatic hydrocarbons. 	unsaturated hydrocarbons with at least one double bond	3.b
Unsaturated hydrocarbons contain at least one double or triple bond between carbon atoms. As a result, the carbon atoms are unable to bond with as many hydrogen atoms as they would if they were joined only by single bonds. This makes them unsaturated with hydrogen. Unsaturated hydrocarbons are classified on the basis of their bonds as alkenes, alkynes, or aromatic hydrocarbons. 	ringshaped saturated hydrocarbons	4.g
Unsaturated hydrocarbons contain at least one double or triple bond between carbon atoms. As a result, the carbon atoms are unable to bond with as many hydrogen atoms as they would if they were joined only by single bonds. This makes them unsaturated with hydrogen. Unsaturated hydrocarbons are classified on the basis of their bonds as alkenes, alkynes, or aromatic hydrocarbons. 	saturated hydrocarbons such as ethane	5.a
Even compounds with the same number of carbon and hydrogen atoms can have different shapes. These compounds are called isomers. Look at the examples in Figure 9.9. The figure shows the structural formulas of butane and its isomer iso-butane. Both molecules have four carbon atoms and ten hydrogen atoms (C4 H10 ), but the atoms are arranged differently. Butane is a straight-chain molecule. Iso-butane is branched. You can see three-dimensional models of these two isomers at the URLs below. You can rotate the molecule models to get a better idea of their shapes. 	molecules with the same atoms but different shapes	6.e
Unsaturated hydrocarbons contain at least one double or triple bond between carbon atoms. As a result, the carbon atoms are unable to bond with as many hydrogen atoms as they would if they were joined only by single bonds. This makes them unsaturated with hydrogen. Unsaturated hydrocarbons are classified on the basis of their bonds as alkenes, alkynes, or aromatic hydrocarbons. 	unsaturated hydrocarbons with at least one triple bond	7.c
Lipids are biochemical compounds such as fats and oils. Organisms use lipids to store energy. In addition to carbon and hydrogen, lipids contain oxygen. 	all biochemical compounds contain hydrogen	true
Lipids are biochemical compounds such as fats and oils. Organisms use lipids to store energy. In addition to carbon and hydrogen, lipids contain oxygen. 	there are a total of 20 different biochemical compounds	false
Nucleic acids are biochemical molecules that contain oxygen, nitrogen, and phosphorus in addition to carbon and hydrogen. There are two main types of nucleic acids. They are DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and RNA (ribonucleic acid). 	some nucleic acids are hormones that regulate life processes	false
Lipids are biochemical compounds such as fats and oils. Organisms use lipids to store energy. In addition to carbon and hydrogen, lipids contain oxygen. 	biochemical compounds are carbonbased compounds found in living things	true
Sugars are simple carbohydrates. Molecules of sugar have just a few carbon atoms. The simplest sugar is glucose (C6 H12 O6 ). Glucose is the sugar that the cells of living things use for energy. Plants and some other organisms make glucose in the process of photosynthesis. Living things that cannot make glucose obtain it by consuming plants or these other organisms. You can see the structural formula of glucose and two other sugars in Figure 9.16. The other sugars in the figure are fructose and sucrose. Fructose is an isomer of glucose. It is found in fruits. It has the same atoms as glucose, but they are arranged differently. Sucrose is table sugar. It consists of one molecule of glucose and one molecule of fructose. 	the simplest sugar is named sucrose	false
Starches are complex carbohydrates. They are polymers of glucose. They consist of hundreds of glucose monomers bonded together. Plants make starch to store extra sugars. Consumers get starch from plants. Common sources of starch in the human diet are pictured in Figure 9.17. Our digestive system breaks down starch to simple sugars, which our cells use for energy. 	the main function of simple carbohydrates is to store energy in animals	false
Starches are complex carbohydrates. They are polymers of glucose. They consist of hundreds of glucose monomers bonded together. Plants make starch to store extra sugars. Consumers get starch from plants. Common sources of starch in the human diet are pictured in Figure 9.17. Our digestive system breaks down starch to simple sugars, which our cells use for energy. 	bread is a good source of starch in the diet	true
Lipids are biochemical compounds such as fats and oils. Organisms use lipids to store energy. In addition to carbon and hydrogen, lipids contain oxygen. 	we need oils to help move food wastes through the digestive tract	false
Proteins are biochemical compounds that contain oxygen, nitrogen, and sulfur in addition to carbon and hydrogen. Protein molecules consist of one or more chains of small molecules called amino acids. 	the only biochemical compounds that contains sulfur are nucleic acids	false
Proteins are the most common biochemicals. They have many different functions, including: making up tissues as components of muscle. speeding up biochemical reactions as enzymes. regulating life processes as hormones. helping defend against infections as antibodies. transporting materials as components of the blood (see the example in Figure 9.20). 	hemoglobin is a protein that fights infections in the blood	false
Carbohydrates are biochemical compounds that include sugars, starches, and cellulose. They contain oxygen in addition to carbon and hydrogen. Organisms use carbohydrates mainly for energy. 	the most abundant biochemical compound is cellulose	true
Lipids are biochemical compounds such as fats and oils. Organisms use lipids to store energy. In addition to carbon and hydrogen, lipids contain oxygen. 	hemoglobin transports oxygen through the blood	true
Proteins are the most common biochemicals. They have many different functions, including: making up tissues as components of muscle. speeding up biochemical reactions as enzymes. regulating life processes as hormones. helping defend against infections as antibodies. transporting materials as components of the blood (see the example in Figure 9.20). 	muscle tissues are composed mainly of fatty acids	false
Lipids are biochemical compounds such as fats and oils. Organisms use lipids to store energy. In addition to carbon and hydrogen, lipids contain oxygen. 	organisms use lipids mainly to store energy	true
Nucleic acids are biochemical molecules that contain oxygen, nitrogen, and phosphorus in addition to carbon and hydrogen. There are two main types of nucleic acids. They are DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and RNA (ribonucleic acid). 	there are two main types of nucleic acids	true
Lipids are biochemical compounds such as fats and oils. Organisms use lipids to store energy. In addition to carbon and hydrogen, lipids contain oxygen. 	long carbon chains found in lipids	1.f
Lipids are biochemical compounds such as fats and oils. Organisms use lipids to store energy. In addition to carbon and hydrogen, lipids contain oxygen. 	class of biochemical compounds that includes oils	2.b
Lipids are biochemical compounds such as fats and oils. Organisms use lipids to store energy. In addition to carbon and hydrogen, lipids contain oxygen. 	general name given to biochemical polymers	3.e
Lipids are biochemical compounds such as fats and oils. Organisms use lipids to store energy. In addition to carbon and hydrogen, lipids contain oxygen. 	class of biochemical compounds that includes dna	4.d
Amino acids are the "building blocks" of proteins. There are 20 different common amino acids. The structural formula of the simplest amino acid, called glycine, is shown in Figure 9.19. Other amino acids have a similar structure. The sequence of amino acids and the number of amino acid chains in a protein determine the proteins shape. The shape of a protein, in turn, determines its function. Shapes may be very complex. You can learn more about the structure of proteins at the URL below. MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	building blocks of proteins	5.g
Carbohydrates are biochemical compounds that include sugars, starches, and cellulose. They contain oxygen in addition to carbon and hydrogen. Organisms use carbohydrates mainly for energy. 	class of biochemical compounds that includes cellulose	6.a
Lipids are biochemical compounds such as fats and oils. Organisms use lipids to store energy. In addition to carbon and hydrogen, lipids contain oxygen. 	class of biochemical compounds that includes enzymes	7.c
Most of the energy used by living things comes either directly or indirectly from the sun. Sunlight provides the energy for photosynthesis. This is the process in which plants and certain other organisms (see Figure 9.26) synthesize glucose (C6 H12 O6 ). The process uses carbon dioxide and water and also produces oxygen. The overall chemical equation for photosynthesis is: 6CO2 + 6H2 O + Light Energy ! C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 Photosynthesis changes light energy to chemical energy. The chemical energy is stored in the bonds of glucose molecules. Glucose is used for energy by the cells of almost all living things. Plants make their own glucose. Other organisms get glucose by consuming plants (or organisms that consume plants). How do living things get energy from glucose? The answer is cellular respiration. 	all organisms make food by photosynthesis	false
Cellular respiration is the process in which the cells of living things break down glucose with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide, water, and energy. The overall chemical equation for cellular respiration is: C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 ! 6CO2 + 6H2 O + Heat and Chemical Energy Cellular respiration releases some of the energy in glucose as heat. It uses the rest of the energy to form many, even smaller molecules. The smaller molecules contain just the right amount of energy to power chemical reactions inside cells. You can look at cellular respiration in more detail at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the synthesis of glucose requires carbon dioxide	true
Most of the energy used by living things comes either directly or indirectly from the sun. Sunlight provides the energy for photosynthesis. This is the process in which plants and certain other organisms (see Figure 9.26) synthesize glucose (C6 H12 O6 ). The process uses carbon dioxide and water and also produces oxygen. The overall chemical equation for photosynthesis is: 6CO2 + 6H2 O + Light Energy ! C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 Photosynthesis changes light energy to chemical energy. The chemical energy is stored in the bonds of glucose molecules. Glucose is used for energy by the cells of almost all living things. Plants make their own glucose. Other organisms get glucose by consuming plants (or organisms that consume plants). How do living things get energy from glucose? The answer is cellular respiration. 	insectcatching plants such as pitcher plants obtain glucose from insects	false
Cellular respiration is the process in which the cells of living things break down glucose with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide, water, and energy. The overall chemical equation for cellular respiration is: C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 ! 6CO2 + 6H2 O + Heat and Chemical Energy Cellular respiration releases some of the energy in glucose as heat. It uses the rest of the energy to form many, even smaller molecules. The smaller molecules contain just the right amount of energy to power chemical reactions inside cells. You can look at cellular respiration in more detail at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	chemical reactions provide living cells with energy	true
Most of the energy used by living things comes either directly or indirectly from the sun. Sunlight provides the energy for photosynthesis. This is the process in which plants and certain other organisms (see Figure 9.26) synthesize glucose (C6 H12 O6 ). The process uses carbon dioxide and water and also produces oxygen. The overall chemical equation for photosynthesis is: 6CO2 + 6H2 O + Light Energy ! C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 Photosynthesis changes light energy to chemical energy. The chemical energy is stored in the bonds of glucose molecules. Glucose is used for energy by the cells of almost all living things. Plants make their own glucose. Other organisms get glucose by consuming plants (or organisms that consume plants). How do living things get energy from glucose? The answer is cellular respiration. 	photosynthesis is an exothermic or energyreleasing process	false
Most of the energy used by living things comes either directly or indirectly from the sun. Sunlight provides the energy for photosynthesis. This is the process in which plants and certain other organisms (see Figure 9.26) synthesize glucose (C6 H12 O6 ). The process uses carbon dioxide and water and also produces oxygen. The overall chemical equation for photosynthesis is: 6CO2 + 6H2 O + Light Energy ! C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 Photosynthesis changes light energy to chemical energy. The chemical energy is stored in the bonds of glucose molecules. Glucose is used for energy by the cells of almost all living things. Plants make their own glucose. Other organisms get glucose by consuming plants (or organisms that consume plants). How do living things get energy from glucose? The answer is cellular respiration. 	the overall chemical reaction for photosynthesis is represented by the equation c6 h12 o6  6o2  6co2	false
Cellular respiration is the process in which the cells of living things break down glucose with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide, water, and energy. The overall chemical equation for cellular respiration is: C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 ! 6CO2 + 6H2 O + Heat and Chemical Energy Cellular respiration releases some of the energy in glucose as heat. It uses the rest of the energy to form many, even smaller molecules. The smaller molecules contain just the right amount of energy to power chemical reactions inside cells. You can look at cellular respiration in more detail at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	products of cellular respiration include many small energystoring molecules	true
Most of the energy used by living things comes either directly or indirectly from the sun. Sunlight provides the energy for photosynthesis. This is the process in which plants and certain other organisms (see Figure 9.26) synthesize glucose (C6 H12 O6 ). The process uses carbon dioxide and water and also produces oxygen. The overall chemical equation for photosynthesis is: 6CO2 + 6H2 O + Light Energy ! C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 Photosynthesis changes light energy to chemical energy. The chemical energy is stored in the bonds of glucose molecules. Glucose is used for energy by the cells of almost all living things. Plants make their own glucose. Other organisms get glucose by consuming plants (or organisms that consume plants). How do living things get energy from glucose? The answer is cellular respiration. 	cellular respiration takes place only in organisms that cannot make their own food	false
Cellular respiration is the process in which the cells of living things break down glucose with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide, water, and energy. The overall chemical equation for cellular respiration is: C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 ! 6CO2 + 6H2 O + Heat and Chemical Energy Cellular respiration releases some of the energy in glucose as heat. It uses the rest of the energy to form many, even smaller molecules. The smaller molecules contain just the right amount of energy to power chemical reactions inside cells. You can look at cellular respiration in more detail at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the process of cellular respiration requires carbon dioxide	false
Cellular respiration is the process in which the cells of living things break down glucose with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide, water, and energy. The overall chemical equation for cellular respiration is: C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 ! 6CO2 + 6H2 O + Heat and Chemical Energy Cellular respiration releases some of the energy in glucose as heat. It uses the rest of the energy to form many, even smaller molecules. The smaller molecules contain just the right amount of energy to power chemical reactions inside cells. You can look at cellular respiration in more detail at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	one of the products of cellular respiration is oxygen	false
Human body temperature must remain within a narrow range around 37C (98.6F). At this temperature, most biochemical reactions would occur too slowly to keep us alive. Thats where enzymes come in. Enzymes are biochemical catalysts. They speed up biochemical reactions, not only in humans but in virtually all living things. Most enzymes are proteins. Two are described in Figure 9.27. 	all living things need energy just to stay alive	true
Cellular respiration is the process in which the cells of living things break down glucose with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide, water, and energy. The overall chemical equation for cellular respiration is: C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 ! 6CO2 + 6H2 O + Heat and Chemical Energy Cellular respiration releases some of the energy in glucose as heat. It uses the rest of the energy to form many, even smaller molecules. The smaller molecules contain just the right amount of energy to power chemical reactions inside cells. You can look at cellular respiration in more detail at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	cellular respiration is an endothermic or energyabsorbing process	false
Most of the energy used by living things comes either directly or indirectly from the sun. Sunlight provides the energy for photosynthesis. This is the process in which plants and certain other organisms (see Figure 9.26) synthesize glucose (C6 H12 O6 ). The process uses carbon dioxide and water and also produces oxygen. The overall chemical equation for photosynthesis is: 6CO2 + 6H2 O + Light Energy ! C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 Photosynthesis changes light energy to chemical energy. The chemical energy is stored in the bonds of glucose molecules. Glucose is used for energy by the cells of almost all living things. Plants make their own glucose. Other organisms get glucose by consuming plants (or organisms that consume plants). How do living things get energy from glucose? The answer is cellular respiration. 	only plants can carry out photosynthesis	false
Cellular respiration is the process in which the cells of living things break down glucose with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide, water, and energy. The overall chemical equation for cellular respiration is: C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 ! 6CO2 + 6H2 O + Heat and Chemical Energy Cellular respiration releases some of the energy in glucose as heat. It uses the rest of the energy to form many, even smaller molecules. The smaller molecules contain just the right amount of energy to power chemical reactions inside cells. You can look at cellular respiration in more detail at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	cellular respiration occurs in all living cells	true
Cellular respiration is the process in which the cells of living things break down glucose with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide, water, and energy. The overall chemical equation for cellular respiration is: C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 ! 6CO2 + 6H2 O + Heat and Chemical Energy Cellular respiration releases some of the energy in glucose as heat. It uses the rest of the energy to form many, even smaller molecules. The smaller molecules contain just the right amount of energy to power chemical reactions inside cells. You can look at cellular respiration in more detail at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	one of the products of cellular respiration is oxygen	false
Cellular respiration is the process in which the cells of living things break down glucose with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide, water, and energy. The overall chemical equation for cellular respiration is: C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 ! 6CO2 + 6H2 O + Heat and Chemical Energy Cellular respiration releases some of the energy in glucose as heat. It uses the rest of the energy to form many, even smaller molecules. The smaller molecules contain just the right amount of energy to power chemical reactions inside cells. You can look at cellular respiration in more detail at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	process in which cells break down glucose and release energy	1. d
Cellular respiration is the process in which the cells of living things break down glucose with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide, water, and energy. The overall chemical equation for cellular respiration is: C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 ! 6CO2 + 6H2 O + Heat and Chemical Energy Cellular respiration releases some of the energy in glucose as heat. It uses the rest of the energy to form many, even smaller molecules. The smaller molecules contain just the right amount of energy to power chemical reactions inside cells. You can look at cellular respiration in more detail at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	any chemical reaction that takes place in living things	2. b
Human body temperature must remain within a narrow range around 37C (98.6F). At this temperature, most biochemical reactions would occur too slowly to keep us alive. Thats where enzymes come in. Enzymes are biochemical catalysts. They speed up biochemical reactions, not only in humans but in virtually all living things. Most enzymes are proteins. Two are described in Figure 9.27. 	protein that speeds up biochemical reactions	3.g
Most of the energy used by living things comes either directly or indirectly from the sun. Sunlight provides the energy for photosynthesis. This is the process in which plants and certain other organisms (see Figure 9.26) synthesize glucose (C6 H12 O6 ). The process uses carbon dioxide and water and also produces oxygen. The overall chemical equation for photosynthesis is: 6CO2 + 6H2 O + Light Energy ! C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 Photosynthesis changes light energy to chemical energy. The chemical energy is stored in the bonds of glucose molecules. Glucose is used for energy by the cells of almost all living things. Plants make their own glucose. Other organisms get glucose by consuming plants (or organisms that consume plants). How do living things get energy from glucose? The answer is cellular respiration. 	byproduct of photosynthesis	4.c
Cellular respiration is the process in which the cells of living things break down glucose with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide, water, and energy. The overall chemical equation for cellular respiration is: C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 ! 6CO2 + 6H2 O + Heat and Chemical Energy Cellular respiration releases some of the energy in glucose as heat. It uses the rest of the energy to form many, even smaller molecules. The smaller molecules contain just the right amount of energy to power chemical reactions inside cells. You can look at cellular respiration in more detail at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	compound that cells use for energy	5.e
Cellular respiration is the process in which the cells of living things break down glucose with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide, water, and energy. The overall chemical equation for cellular respiration is: C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 ! 6CO2 + 6H2 O + Heat and Chemical Energy Cellular respiration releases some of the energy in glucose as heat. It uses the rest of the energy to form many, even smaller molecules. The smaller molecules contain just the right amount of energy to power chemical reactions inside cells. You can look at cellular respiration in more detail at this URL:  MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	pigment that captures light energy	6.f
Most of the energy used by living things comes either directly or indirectly from the sun. Sunlight provides the energy for photosynthesis. This is the process in which plants and certain other organisms (see Figure 9.26) synthesize glucose (C6 H12 O6 ). The process uses carbon dioxide and water and also produces oxygen. The overall chemical equation for photosynthesis is: 6CO2 + 6H2 O + Light Energy ! C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 Photosynthesis changes light energy to chemical energy. The chemical energy is stored in the bonds of glucose molecules. Glucose is used for energy by the cells of almost all living things. Plants make their own glucose. Other organisms get glucose by consuming plants (or organisms that consume plants). How do living things get energy from glucose? The answer is cellular respiration. 	process in which certain organisms make glucose	7.a
Acceleration is a measure of the change in velocity of a moving object. It measures the rate at which velocity changes. Velocity, in turn, is a measure of the speed and direction of motion, so a change in velocity may reflect a change in speed, a change in direction, or both. Both velocity and acceleration are vectors. A vector is any measurement that has both size and direction. People commonly think of acceleration as in increase in speed, but a decrease in speed is also acceleration. In this case, acceleration is negative and called deceleration. A change in direction without a change in speed is acceleration as well. Q: Can you think of an example of acceleration that doesnt involve a change in speed? A: Driving at a constant speed around a bend in a road is one example. Use your imagination to think of others. 	acceleration is a vector	true
If you are accelerating, you may be able to feel the change in velocity. This is true whether the change is in speed, direction, or both. You often feel acceleration when you ride in a car. As the car speeds up, you feel as though you are being pressed against the seat. When the car slows down, you feel like you are being pushed forward, especially if the change in speed is sudden. If the car changes direction and turns right, you feel as though you are being pushed to the left. With a left turn, you feel a push to the right. The next time you ride in a car, notice how it feels as the car accelerates in each of these ways. 	a change in direction without a change in speed is called velocity	false
Acceleration is a measure of the change in velocity of a moving object. It measures the rate at which velocity changes. Velocity, in turn, is a measure of the speed and direction of motion, so a change in velocity may reflect a change in speed, a change in direction, or both. Both velocity and acceleration are vectors. A vector is any measurement that has both size and direction. People commonly think of acceleration as in increase in speed, but a decrease in speed is also acceleration. In this case, acceleration is negative and called deceleration. A change in direction without a change in speed is acceleration as well. Q: Can you think of an example of acceleration that doesnt involve a change in speed? A: Driving at a constant speed around a bend in a road is one example. Use your imagination to think of others. 	acceleration can never be negative	false
Gravity is a force that pulls objects down toward the ground. When objects fall to the ground, gravity causes them to accelerate. Acceleration is a change in velocity, and velocity, in turn, is a measure of the speed and direction of motion. Gravity causes an object to fall toward the ground at a faster and faster velocity the longer the object falls. In fact, its velocity increases by 9.8 m/s2, so by 1 second after an object starts falling, its velocity is 9.8 m/s. By 2 seconds after it starts falling, its velocity is 19.6 m/s (9.8 m/s + 9.8 m/s), and so on. The acceleration of a falling object due to gravity is illustrated in the Figure 1.1. Q: In this diagram, the boy drops the object at time t= 0 s. By t = 1 s, the object is falling at a velocity of 9.8 m/s. What is its velocity by t = 5 s? What will its velocity be at t = 6 s if it keeps falling? A: Its velocity at t = 5 s is 49.0 m/s, and at t = 6 s, it will be 58.8 m/s (49.0 m/s + 9.8 m/s). 	a heavier object always falls to the ground more quickly than a lighter object	false
Gravity is a force that pulls objects down toward the ground. When objects fall to the ground, gravity causes them to accelerate. Acceleration is a change in velocity, and velocity, in turn, is a measure of the speed and direction of motion. Gravity causes an object to fall toward the ground at a faster and faster velocity the longer the object falls. In fact, its velocity increases by 9.8 m/s2, so by 1 second after an object starts falling, its velocity is 9.8 m/s. By 2 seconds after it starts falling, its velocity is 19.6 m/s (9.8 m/s + 9.8 m/s), and so on. The acceleration of a falling object due to gravity is illustrated in the Figure 1.1. Q: In this diagram, the boy drops the object at time t= 0 s. By t = 1 s, the object is falling at a velocity of 9.8 m/s. What is its velocity by t = 5 s? What will its velocity be at t = 6 s if it keeps falling? A: Its velocity at t = 5 s is 49.0 m/s, and at t = 6 s, it will be 58.8 m/s (49.0 m/s + 9.8 m/s). 	objects fall toward earth at a constant rate of speed	false
Gravity is a force that pulls objects down toward the ground. When objects fall to the ground, gravity causes them to accelerate. Acceleration is a change in velocity, and velocity, in turn, is a measure of the speed and direction of motion. Gravity causes an object to fall toward the ground at a faster and faster velocity the longer the object falls. In fact, its velocity increases by 9.8 m/s2, so by 1 second after an object starts falling, its velocity is 9.8 m/s. By 2 seconds after it starts falling, its velocity is 19.6 m/s (9.8 m/s + 9.8 m/s), and so on. The acceleration of a falling object due to gravity is illustrated in the Figure 1.1. Q: In this diagram, the boy drops the object at time t= 0 s. By t = 1 s, the object is falling at a velocity of 9.8 m/s. What is its velocity by t = 5 s? What will its velocity be at t = 6 s if it keeps falling? A: Its velocity at t = 5 s is 49.0 m/s, and at t = 6 s, it will be 58.8 m/s (49.0 m/s + 9.8 m/s). 	objects with different masses have the same gravitational force acting on them	false
As you can see from the sketch above, the four golf balls did not land as close to one another as they could have. Each one landed in a different part of the hole. Therefore, these shots are not very precise. The precision of measurements is how close they are to each other. If you make the same measurement twice, the answers are precise if they are the same or at least very close to one another. The golf balls in the sketch below landed quite close together in a cluster, so they would be considered precise. However, they are all far from the hole, so they are not accurate. Q: If you were to hit four golf balls toward a hole and your shots were both accurate and precise, where would the balls land? A: All four golf balls would land in the hole (accurate) and also very close to one another (precise). 	if a measurement is precise it must also be accurate	false
As you can see from the sketch above, the four golf balls did not land as close to one another as they could have. Each one landed in a different part of the hole. Therefore, these shots are not very precise. The precision of measurements is how close they are to each other. If you make the same measurement twice, the answers are precise if they are the same or at least very close to one another. The golf balls in the sketch below landed quite close together in a cluster, so they would be considered precise. However, they are all far from the hole, so they are not accurate. Q: If you were to hit four golf balls toward a hole and your shots were both accurate and precise, where would the balls land? A: All four golf balls would land in the hole (accurate) and also very close to one another (precise). 	only accurate measurements are precise	false
An acid is a compound that produces positive hydrogen ions (H+ ) and negative nonmetal ions when it dissolves in water. (Ions are atoms that have become charged by losing or gaining electrons.) Hydrochloric acid (HCl) is an example of an acid. When it dissolves in water, it produces positive hydrogen ions and negative chloride ions (Cl ). This can be represented by the chemical equation: H O 2 HCl H+ + Cl A base is a compound that produces negative hydroxide ions (OH ) and positive metal ions when it dissolves in water. For example, when the base sodium hydroxide (NaOH) dissolves in water, it produces negative hydroxide ions and positive sodium ions (Na+ ). This can be represented by the chemical equation: H O 2 NaOH OH + Na+ Q: If you were to combine acid and base solutions, what products do you think would be produced? A: Combining acid and base solutions produces water and a neutral ionic compound. 	pure water is an example of a neutral substance	true
Some chemical reactions need a constant input of energy to take place. They are called endothermic reactions. Other chemical reactions release energy when they occur, so they can keep going without any added energy. They are called exothermic reactions. Q: It makes sense that endothermic reactions need activation energy. But do exothermic reactions also need activation energy? A: All chemical reactions need energy to get started, even exothermic reactions. Look at the Figure 1.1. They compare energy changes that occur during endothermic and exothermic reactions. From the graphs, you can see that both types of reactions need the same amount of activation energy in order to get started. Only after it starts does the exothermic reaction produce more energy than it uses. 	only endothermic reactions require activation energy	false
Chemical reactions also need energy to be activated. They require a certain amount of energy just to get started. This energy is called activation energy. For example, activation energy is needed to start a car engine. Turning the key causes a spark that activates the burning of gasoline in the engine. The combustion of gas wont occur without the spark of energy to begin the reaction. Q: Why is activation energy needed? Why wont a reaction occur without it? A: A reaction wont occur unless atoms or molecules of reactants come together. This happens only if the particles are moving, and movement takes energy. Often, reactants have to overcome forces that push them apart. This takes energy as well. Still more energy is needed to start breaking bonds in reactants. 	a chemical reaction will not occur unless reactants are moving	true
Some chemical reactions need a constant input of energy to take place. They are called endothermic reactions. Other chemical reactions release energy when they occur, so they can keep going without any added energy. They are called exothermic reactions. Q: It makes sense that endothermic reactions need activation energy. But do exothermic reactions also need activation energy? A: All chemical reactions need energy to get started, even exothermic reactions. Look at the Figure 1.1. They compare energy changes that occur during endothermic and exothermic reactions. From the graphs, you can see that both types of reactions need the same amount of activation energy in order to get started. Only after it starts does the exothermic reaction produce more energy than it uses. 	all chemical reactions need a constant input of energy to continue	false
Some chemical reactions need a constant input of energy to take place. They are called endothermic reactions. Other chemical reactions release energy when they occur, so they can keep going without any added energy. They are called exothermic reactions. Q: It makes sense that endothermic reactions need activation energy. But do exothermic reactions also need activation energy? A: All chemical reactions need energy to get started, even exothermic reactions. Look at the Figure 1.1. They compare energy changes that occur during endothermic and exothermic reactions. From the graphs, you can see that both types of reactions need the same amount of activation energy in order to get started. Only after it starts does the exothermic reaction produce more energy than it uses. 	exothermic reactions always need less activation energy than endothermic reactions	false
Barium (Ba) is one of six elements in group 2 of the periodic table, which is shown in Figure 1.1. Elements in this group are called alkaline Earth metals. These metals are silver or gray in color. They are relatively soft and low in density, although not as soft and lightweight as alkali metals. 	all alkaline earth metals have three valence electrons	false
Barium (Ba) is one of six elements in group 2 of the periodic table, which is shown in Figure 1.1. Elements in this group are called alkaline Earth metals. These metals are silver or gray in color. They are relatively soft and low in density, although not as soft and lightweight as alkali metals. 	alkaline earth metals are the most reactive metals	false
All alkaline Earth metals have similar properties because they all have two valence electrons. They readily give up their two valence electrons to achieve a full outer energy level, which is the most stable arrangement of electrons. As a result, they are very reactive, although not quite as reactive as the alkali metals in group 1. For example, alkaline Earth metals will react with cold water, but not explosively as alkali metals do. Because of their reactivity, alkaline Earth metals never exist as pure substances in nature. Instead, they are always found combined with other elements. The reactivity of alkaline Earth metals increases from the top to the bottom of the group. Thats because the atoms get bigger from the top to the bottom, so the valence electrons are farther from the nucleus. When valence electrons are farther from the nucleus, they are attracted less strongly by the nucleus and more easily removed from the atom. This makes the atom more reactive. Q: Alkali metals have just one valence electron. Why are alkaline Earth metals less reactive than alkali metals? A: It takes more energy to remove two valence electrons from an atom than one valence electron. This makes alkaline Earth metals with their two valence electrons less reactive than alkali metals with their one valence electron. 	alkaline earth metals never exist as pure substances in nature	true
An alloy is a mixture of a metal with one or more other elements. The other elements may be metals, nonmetals, or both. An alloy is formed by melting a metal and dissolving the other elements in it. The molten solution is then allowed to cool and harden. Alloys generally have more useful properties than pure metals. Several examples of alloys are described and pictured below. If you have braces on your teeth, you might even have this alloy in your mouth! Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	alloys consist only of metallic elements	false
An alloy is a mixture of a metal with one or more other elements. The other elements may be metals, nonmetals, or both. An alloy is formed by melting a metal and dissolving the other elements in it. The molten solution is then allowed to cool and harden. Alloys generally have more useful properties than pure metals. Several examples of alloys are described and pictured below. If you have braces on your teeth, you might even have this alloy in your mouth! Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	most metal objects are made of alloys rather than pure metals	true
Most metal objects are made of alloys rather than pure metals. Objects made of four different alloys are shown in the Figure 1.1. Brass saxophone: Brass is an alloy of copper and zinc. It is softer than bronze and easier to shape. Its also very shiny. Notice the curved pieces in this shiny brass saxophone. Brass is used for shap- ing many other curved objects, such as doorknobs and plumbing fixtures. Stain- less steel sink: Stainless steel is a type of steel that contains nickel and chromium in addition to carbon and iron. It is shiny, strong, and resistant to rusting. This makes it useful for sinks, eating utensils, and other objects that are exposed to wa- ter. "Gold" bracelet: Pure gold is relatively soft, so it is rarely used for jewelry. Most "gold" jewelry is actually made of an alloy of gold, copper and silver. Bronze statue: Bronze was the first alloy ever made. The earliest bronze dates back many thou- sands of years. Bronze is a mixture of copper and tin. Both copper and tin are relatively soft metals, but mixed together in bronze they are much harder. Bronze has been used for statues, coins, and other objects. Q: Sterling silver is an alloy that is used to make fine jewelry. What elements do you think sterling silver contains? What properties might sterling silver have that make it more useful than pure silver? A: Most sterling silver is about 93 percent silver and about 7 percent copper. Sterling silver is harder and stronger than pure silver, while retaining the malleability and luster of pure silver. 	brass is an alloy that is used for doorknobs and plumbing fixtures	true
Alpha decay occurs when a nucleus is unstable because it has too many protons. The Figure 1.1 shows what happens during alpha decay. The nucleus emits an alpha particle and energy. An alpha particle consists of two protons and two neutrons, which is actually a helium nucleus. Losing the protons and neutrons makes the nucleus more stable. 	an alpha particle consists of one proton and one neutron	false
Radioactive elements and isotopes have unstable nuclei. To become more stable, the nuclei undergo radioactive decay. In radioactive decay, the nuclei give off, or emit, radiation in the form of energy and often particles as well. There are several types of radioactive decay, including alpha, beta, and gamma decay. Energy is emitted in all three types of decay, but only alpha and beta decay also emit particles. 	alpha decay is the least dangerous type of radioactive decay	true
Did you ever notice when you get into a bathtub of water that the level of the water rises? More than 2000 years ago, a Greek mathematician named Archimedes noticed the same thing. He observed that both a body and the water in a tub cant occupy the same space at the same time. As a result, some of the water is displaced, or moved out of the way. How much water is displaced? Archimedes determined that the volume of displaced water equals the volume of the submerged object. So more water is displaced by a bigger body than a smaller one. Q: If you jump into swimming pool, how much water does your body displace? A: The water displaced by your body is equal to your bodys volume. Depending on your size, this volume might be about 0.07 m3 . 	archimedes was a greek mathematician who lived more than 2000 years ago	true
Did you ever notice when you get into a bathtub of water that the level of the water rises? More than 2000 years ago, a Greek mathematician named Archimedes noticed the same thing. He observed that both a body and the water in a tub cant occupy the same space at the same time. As a result, some of the water is displaced, or moved out of the way. How much water is displaced? Archimedes determined that the volume of displaced water equals the volume of the submerged object. So more water is displaced by a bigger body than a smaller one. Q: If you jump into swimming pool, how much water does your body displace? A: The water displaced by your body is equal to your bodys volume. Depending on your size, this volume might be about 0.07 m3 . 	a bigger object displaces less water than a smaller object	false
Objects such as ships may float in a fluid like water because of buoyant force. This is an upward force that a fluid exerts on any object that is placed in it. Archimedes discovered that the buoyant force acting on an object equals the weight of the fluid displaced by the object. This is known as Archimedes law (or Archimedes principle). 	archimedes law explains why some very heavy objects can float on water	true
A fluorescent light bulb produces visible light by fluorescence. Fluorescence occurs when a substance absorbs shorter-wavelength ultraviolet light and then gives off the energy as visible light. The compact fluorescent light bulb (CFL) in the Figure 1.2 contains mercury gas that gives off ultraviolet light when electricity passes through it. The inside of the bulb is coated with a substance called phosphor. Phosphor absorbs the ultraviolet light and then gives off most of the energy as visible light. 	in a fluorescent light bulb mercury gas gives off visible light	false
A fluorescent light bulb produces visible light by fluorescence. Fluorescence occurs when a substance absorbs shorter-wavelength ultraviolet light and then gives off the energy as visible light. The compact fluorescent light bulb (CFL) in the Figure 1.2 contains mercury gas that gives off ultraviolet light when electricity passes through it. The inside of the bulb is coated with a substance called phosphor. Phosphor absorbs the ultraviolet light and then gives off most of the energy as visible light. 	a vapor light produces light by fluorescence	false
Electromagnetic force is a force of attraction or repulsion between all electrically charged particles. This force is transferred between charged particles of matter by fundamental force-carrying particles called photons. Because of electromagnetic force, particles with opposite charges attract each other and particles with the same charge repel each other. Inside the atom, two types of subatomic particles have electric charge: electrons, which have an electric charge of -1, and protons, which have an opposite but equal electric charge of +1. The model of an atom in the Figure 1.1 shows both types of charged particles. Protons are found inside the nucleus at the center of the atom, and they give the nucleus a positive charge. (There are also neutrons in the nucleus, but they have no electric charge.) Negative electrons stay in the area surrounding the positive nucleus because of the electromagnetic force of attraction between them. Q: Why do you think protons cluster together in the nucleus of the atom instead of repelling each other because of their like charges? A: The electromagnetic force of repulsion between positively charged protons is overcome by a stronger force, called the strong nuclear force. 	the strong nuclear force is a force of attraction between quarks	true
The weak nuclear force is transferred by the exchange of force-carrying fundamental particles called W and Z bosons. This force is also a very short-range force that works only within the nucleus of the atom. It is much weaker than the strong force or electromagnetic force that are also at work inside the atom. Unlike these other two forces, the weak nuclear force does not bind subatomic particles together in an atom. Instead, it changes subatomic particles from one type to another. The Figure 1.3 shows one way this can happen. In this figure, an up quark in a proton is changed by the weak force to a down quark. This changes the proton (uud) to a neutron (udd). Q: If the weak force causes a proton to change to a neutron, how does this change the atom? A: The resulting atom represents a different element. Thats because each element has a unique number of protons. For example, all atoms of helium have two protons. If one of the protons in a helium atom changes to a neutron, the resulting atom would have just one proton, so the atom would no longer be a helium atom. Instead it would be a hydrogen atom, because all hydrogen atoms have a single proton. 	the weak nuclear force is transferred by w and z bosons	true
The strong nuclear force is a force of attraction between fundamental particles called quarks, which have a type of charge called color charge. The strong nuclear force is transferred between quarks by fundamental force-carrying particles called gluons. Both protons and neutrons consist of quarks. The exchange of gluons holds quarks together within a proton or neutron. Excess, or residual, strong force holds together protons and neutrons in the nucleus. The strong nuclear force is strong enough to overcome the electromagnetic force of repulsion pushing protons apart. Both forces are represented in the Figure 1.2. The strong nuclear force works only over very short distances. As a result, it isnt effective if the nucleus gets too big. As more protons are added to the nucleus, the electromagnetic force of repulsion between them gets stronger, while the strong nuclear force of attraction between them gets weaker. This puts an upper limit on the number of protons an atom can have and remain stable. If atoms have more than 83 protons, the electromagnetic repulsion between them is greater than the strong nuclear force of attraction between them. This makes the nucleus unstable, or radioactive, so it breaks down. The following video discusses the strong nuclear force and its role in the atom. The types of quarks found in protons and neutrons are called up quarks (u) and down quarks (d). Each proton consists of two up quarks and one down quark (uud), and each neutron consists of one up quark and two down quarks (udd). This diagram represents two protons. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	up quarks can change to down quarks	true
The nucleus (plural, nuclei) is a positively charged region at the center of the atom. It consists of two types of subatomic particles packed tightly together. The particles are protons, which have a positive electric charge, and neutrons, which are neutral in electric charge. Outside of the nucleus, an atom is mostly empty space, with orbiting negative particles called electrons whizzing through it. The Figure 1.1 shows these parts of the atom. 	outside of the nucleus an atom is mostly empty space	true
The nucleus of the atom is extremely small. Its radius is only about 1/100,000 of the total radius of the atom. If an atom were the size of a football stadium, the nucleus would be about the size of a pea! Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Electrons have virtually no mass, but protons and neutrons have a lot of mass for their size. As a result, the nucleus has virtually all the mass of an atom. Given its great mass and tiny size, the nucleus is very dense. If an object the size of a penny had the same density as the nucleus of an atom, its mass would be greater than 30 million tons! Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the nucleus makes up about 1100th of the total radius of an atom	false
The nucleus of the atom is extremely small. Its radius is only about 1/100,000 of the total radius of the atom. If an atom were the size of a football stadium, the nucleus would be about the size of a pea! Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Electrons have virtually no mass, but protons and neutrons have a lot of mass for their size. As a result, the nucleus has virtually all the mass of an atom. Given its great mass and tiny size, the nucleus is very dense. If an object the size of a penny had the same density as the nucleus of an atom, its mass would be greater than 30 million tons! Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the nucleus has almost all of the mass of an atom	true
The nucleus (plural, nuclei) is a positively charged region at the center of the atom. It consists of two types of subatomic particles packed tightly together. The particles are protons, which have a positive electric charge, and neutrons, which are neutral in electric charge. Outside of the nucleus, an atom is mostly empty space, with orbiting negative particles called electrons whizzing through it. The Figure 1.1 shows these parts of the atom. 	there is an electric force of repulsion between neutrons and protons	false
The number of protons in an atom is called its atomic number. This number is very important because it is unique for atoms of a given element. All atoms of an element have the same number of protons, and every element has a different number of protons in its atoms. For example, all helium atoms have two protons, and no other elements have atoms with two protons. In the case of helium, the atomic number is 2. The atomic number of an element is usually written in front of and slightly below the elements symbol, like in the Figure 1.2 for helium. Atoms are neutral in electrical charge because they have the same number of negative electrons as positive protons. Therefore, the atomic number of an atom also tells you how many electrons the atom has. This, in turn, determines many of the atoms properties. 	all atoms of a given element have the same number of protons	true
The number of protons in an atom is called its atomic number. This number is very important because it is unique for atoms of a given element. All atoms of an element have the same number of protons, and every element has a different number of protons in its atoms. For example, all helium atoms have two protons, and no other elements have atoms with two protons. In the case of helium, the atomic number is 2. The atomic number of an element is usually written in front of and slightly below the elements symbol, like in the Figure 1.2 for helium. Atoms are neutral in electrical charge because they have the same number of negative electrons as positive protons. Therefore, the atomic number of an atom also tells you how many electrons the atom has. This, in turn, determines many of the atoms properties. 	atoms of different elements always have different numbers of protons	true
Coefficients are used to balance chemical equations. A coefficient is a number placed in front of a chemical symbol or formula. It shows how many atoms or molecules of the substance are involved in the reaction. For example, two molecules of hydrogen would be written as 2 H2 , and two molecules of water would be written 2 H2 O. A coefficient of 1 usually isnt written. Coefficients can be used to balance equation 1 (above) as follows: Equation 2: 2 H2 + O2  2 H2 O Equation 2 shows that two molecules of hydrogen react with one molecule of oxygen to produce two molecules of water. The two molecules of hydrogen each contain two hydrogen atoms and so do the two molecules of water. Therefore, there are now four hydrogen atoms in both reactants and products. Q: Is equation 2 balanced? A: Count the oxygen atoms to find out. There are two oxygen atoms in the one molecule of oxygen in the reactants. There are also two oxygen atoms in the products, one in each of the two water molecules. Therefore, equation 2 is balanced. 	numbers called subscripts are used to balance chemical equations	false
Beta decay occurs when an unstable nucleus emits a beta particle and energy. A beta particle is either an electron or a positron. An electron is a negatively charged particle, and a positron is a positively charged electron (or anti- electron). When the beta particle is an electron, the decay is called beta-minus decay. When the beta particle is a positron, the decay is called beta-plus decay. Beta-minus decay occurs when a nucleus has too many neutrons relative to protons, and beta-plus decay occurs when a nucleus has too few neutrons relative to protons. Q: Nuclei contain only protons and neutrons, so how can a nucleus emit an electron in beta-minus decay or a positron in beta-plus decay? A: Beta decay begins with a proton or neutron. You can see how in the Figure 1.1. Q: How does beta decay change an atom to a different element? A: In beta-minus decay an atom gains a proton, and it beta-plus decay it loses a proton. In each case, the atom becomes a different element because it has a different number of protons. 	betapositive decay begins with a proton	true
Beta particles can travel about a meter through air. They can pass through a sheet of paper or a layer of cloth but not through a sheet of aluminum or a few centimeters of wood. They can also penetrate the skin and damage underlying tissues. They are even more harmful if they are ingested or inhaled. 	beta particles can travel only a few centimeters through the air	false
Beta decay occurs when an unstable nucleus emits a beta particle and energy. A beta particle is either an electron or a positron. An electron is a negatively charged particle, and a positron is a positively charged electron (or anti- electron). When the beta particle is an electron, the decay is called beta-minus decay. When the beta particle is a positron, the decay is called beta-plus decay. Beta-minus decay occurs when a nucleus has too many neutrons relative to protons, and beta-plus decay occurs when a nucleus has too few neutrons relative to protons. Q: Nuclei contain only protons and neutrons, so how can a nucleus emit an electron in beta-minus decay or a positron in beta-plus decay? A: Beta decay begins with a proton or neutron. You can see how in the Figure 1.1. Q: How does beta decay change an atom to a different element? A: In beta-minus decay an atom gains a proton, and it beta-plus decay it loses a proton. In each case, the atom becomes a different element because it has a different number of protons. 	betapositive decay results in a nucleus with one less proton	true
All biochemical molecules contain hydrogen and oxygen as well as carbon. They may also contain nitrogen, phosphorus, and/or sulfur. Almost all biochemical compounds are polymers. Polymers are large molecules that consist of many smaller, repeating molecules, called monomers. Glucose is a monomer of biochemical compounds called starches. In starches and all other biochemical polymers, monomers are joined together by covalent bonds, in which atoms share pairs of valence electrons. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	there are only about 100 different biochemical compounds	false
Glucose is an example of a biochemical compound. The prefix bio- comes from the Greek word that means life. A biochemical compound is any carbon-based compound that is found in living things. Biochemical compounds make up the cells and tissues of living things. They are also involved in all life processes, including making and using food for energy. Given their diversity of functions, its not surprising that there are millions of different biochemical compounds. Q: Plants make food in the process of photosynthesis. What biochemical compound is synthesized in photosynthe- sis? A: Glucose is synthesized in photosynthesis. Virtually all living things use glucose for energy, but glucose is just one of many examples of biochemical compounds that are found in most or all living things. In fact the similarity in biochemical compounds between living things provides some of the best evidence for the evolution of species from common ancestors. A classic example is the biochemical compound called cytochrome c. It is found in all living organisms because it performs essential life functions. Only slight variations in the molecule exist between closely related species, as you can see in the Figure and the single-celled tetrahymena (pictured in the Figure 1.1), the cytochrome c molecule is nearly 50 percent the same. 	the similarity in biochemical compounds between living things provides some of the best evidence for evolution	true
All biochemical molecules contain hydrogen and oxygen as well as carbon. They may also contain nitrogen, phosphorus, and/or sulfur. Almost all biochemical compounds are polymers. Polymers are large molecules that consist of many smaller, repeating molecules, called monomers. Glucose is a monomer of biochemical compounds called starches. In starches and all other biochemical polymers, monomers are joined together by covalent bonds, in which atoms share pairs of valence electrons. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	almost all biochemical compounds are polymers	true
Some of the most important biochemical reactions are the reactions involved in photosynthesis and cellular respira- tion. Together, these two processes provide energy to almost all of Earths organisms. The two processes are closely related, as you can see in the Figure 1.1. In photosynthesis, light energy from the sun is converted to stored chemical energy in glucose. In cellular respiration, stored energy is released from glucose and stored in smaller amounts that cells can use. A: In photosynthesis, carbon dioxide (CO2 ) and water (H2 O) are the reactants. They combine using energy from light to produce oxygen (O2 ) and glucose (C6 H12 O6 ). Oxygen and glucose, in turn, are the reactants in cellular respiration. They combine to produce carbon dioxide, water, and energy. 	the reactants of photosynthesis are oxygen and water	false
Enzymes are proteins that increase the rate of chemical reactions by reducing the amount of activation energy needed for reactants to start reacting. Enzymes are synthesized in the cells that need them, based on instructions encoded in the cells DNA. Enzymes arent changed or used up in the reactions they catalyze, so they can be used to speed up the same reaction over and over again. Enzymes are highly specific for certain chemical reactions, so they are very effective. A reaction that would take years to occur without its enzyme might occur in a split second with the enzyme. Enzymes are also very efficient, so waste products rarely form. 	photosynthesis is an anabolic reaction	true
Some of the most important biochemical reactions are the reactions involved in photosynthesis and cellular respira- tion. Together, these two processes provide energy to almost all of Earths organisms. The two processes are closely related, as you can see in the Figure 1.1. In photosynthesis, light energy from the sun is converted to stored chemical energy in glucose. In cellular respiration, stored energy is released from glucose and stored in smaller amounts that cells can use. A: In photosynthesis, carbon dioxide (CO2 ) and water (H2 O) are the reactants. They combine using energy from light to produce oxygen (O2 ) and glucose (C6 H12 O6 ). Oxygen and glucose, in turn, are the reactants in cellular respiration. They combine to produce carbon dioxide, water, and energy. 	cellular respiration is a catabolic reaction	true
As a young man, Bohr worked in Rutherfords lab in England. Because Rutherfords model was weak on the position of the electrons, Bohr focused on them. He hypothesized that electrons can move around the nucleus only at fixed distances from the nucleus based on the amount of energy they have. He called these fixed distances energy levels, or electron shells. He thought of them as concentric spheres, with the nucleus at the center of each sphere. In other words, the shells consisted of sphere within sphere within sphere. Furthermore, electrons with less energy would be found at lower energy levels, closer to the nucleus. Those with more energy would be found at higher energy levels, farther from the nucleus. Bohr also hypothesized that if an electron absorbed just the right amount of energy, it would jump to the next higher energy level. Conversely, if it lost the same amount of energy, it would jump back to its original energy level. However, an electron could never exist in between two energy levels. These ideas are illustrated in the Figure 1.2. Q: How is an atom like a ladder? A: Energy levels in an atom are like the rungs of a ladder. Just as you can stand only on the rungs and not in between them, electrons can orbit the nucleus only at fixed distances from the nucleus and not in between them. 	electrons with the most energy are located closest to the nucleus of the atom	false
Bohrs model of the atom is actually a combination of two different ideas: Rutherfords atomic model of electrons orbiting the nucleus and German scientist Max Plancks idea of a quantum, which Planck published in 1901. A quantum (plural, quanta) is the minimum amount of energy that can be absorbed or released by matter. It is a discrete, or distinct, amount of energy. If energy were water and you wanted to add it to matter in the form of a drinking glass, you couldnt simply pour the water continuously into the glass. Instead, you could add it only in small fixed quantities, for example, by the teaspoonful. Bohr reasoned that if electrons can absorb or lose only fixed quantities of energy, then they must vary in their energy by these fixed amounts. Thus, they can occupy only fixed energy levels around the nucleus that correspond to quantum increases in energy. This is a two-dimensional model of a three-dimensional atom. The concen- tric circles actually represent concentric spheres. Q: The idea that energy is transferred only in discrete units, or quanta, was revolutionary when Max Planck first proposed it in 1901. However, what scientists already knew about matter may have made it easier for them to accept the idea of energy quanta. Can you explain? A: Scientists already knew that matter exists in discrete units called atoms. This idea had been demonstrated by John Dalton around 1800. Knowing this may have made it easier for scientists to accept the idea that energy exists in discrete units as well. 	energy levels around the atomic nucleus correspond to quantum increases in energy	true
A covalent compound is a compound in which atoms are held together by covalent bonds. If the covalent bonds are polar, then the covalent compound as a whole may be polar. A polar covalent compound is one in which there is a slight difference in electric charge between opposite sides of the molecule. All polar compounds contain polar bonds. But having polar bonds does not necessarily result in a polar compound. It depends on how the atoms are arranged. This is illustrated in the Figure 1.3. In both molecules, the oxygen atoms attract electrons more strongly than the carbon or hydrogen atoms do, so both molecules have polar bonds. However, only formaldehyde is a polar compound. Carbon dioxide is nonpolar. Q: Why is carbon dioxide nonpolar? A: The symmetrical arrangement of atoms in carbon dioxide results in opposites sides of the molecule having the same charge. 	all molecules with polar bonds are polar molecules	false
Covalent bonds are chemical bonds between atoms of nonmetals that share valence electrons. In some covalent bonds, electrons are not shared equally between the two atoms. These are called polar covalent bonds. The Figure than the hydrogen atoms do because the nucleus of the oxygen atom has more positively charged protons. As a result, the oxygen atom becomes slightly negative in charge, and the hydrogen atoms become slightly positive in charge. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  In other covalent bonds, electrons are shared equally. These bonds are called nonpolar covalent bonds. Neither atom attracts the shared electrons more strongly. As a result, the atoms remain neutral in charge. The oxygen (O2 ) molecule in the Figure 1.2 has two nonpolar bonds. The two oxygen nuclei have an equal force of attraction for their four shared electrons. 	the oxygen end of a water molecule is positively charged	false
Buoyant force is an upward force that fluids exert on any object that is placed in them. The ability of fluids to exert this force is called buoyancy. What explains buoyant force? A fluid exerts pressure in all directions, but the pressure is greater at greater depth. Therefore, the fluid below an object, where the fluid is deeper, exerts greater pressure on the object than the fluid above it. You can see in the Figure 1.1 how this works. Buoyant force explains why the girl pictured above can float in water. Q: Youve probably noticed that some things dont float in water. For example, if you drop a stone in water, it will sink to the bottom rather than floating. If buoyant force applies to all objects in fluids, why do some objects sink instead of float? A: The answer has to do with their weight. 	a fluid exerts pressure only in an upward direction	false
Buoyant force is an upward force that fluids exert on any object that is placed in them. The ability of fluids to exert this force is called buoyancy. What explains buoyant force? A fluid exerts pressure in all directions, but the pressure is greater at greater depth. Therefore, the fluid below an object, where the fluid is deeper, exerts greater pressure on the object than the fluid above it. You can see in the Figure 1.1 how this works. Buoyant force explains why the girl pictured above can float in water. Q: Youve probably noticed that some things dont float in water. For example, if you drop a stone in water, it will sink to the bottom rather than floating. If buoyant force applies to all objects in fluids, why do some objects sink instead of float? A: The answer has to do with their weight. 	fluid pressure is greater at greater depth	true
Buoyant force is an upward force that fluids exert on any object that is placed in them. The ability of fluids to exert this force is called buoyancy. What explains buoyant force? A fluid exerts pressure in all directions, but the pressure is greater at greater depth. Therefore, the fluid below an object, where the fluid is deeper, exerts greater pressure on the object than the fluid above it. You can see in the Figure 1.1 how this works. Buoyant force explains why the girl pictured above can float in water. Q: Youve probably noticed that some things dont float in water. For example, if you drop a stone in water, it will sink to the bottom rather than floating. If buoyant force applies to all objects in fluids, why do some objects sink instead of float? A: The answer has to do with their weight. 	the fluid below an object exerts greater force on it than the fluid above the object	true
A change in an objects motionsuch as Xander speeding up on his scooteris called acceleration. Acceleration occurs whenever an object is acted upon by an unbalanced force. The greater the net force acting on the object, the greater its acceleration will be, but the mass of the object also affects its acceleration. The smaller its mass is, the greater its acceleration for a given amount of force. Newtons second law of motion summarizes these relationships. According to this law, the acceleration of an object equals the net force acting on it divided by its mass. This can be represented by the equation: Acceleration = Net force Mass or a = F m 	any change in an objects motion is called velocity	false
A change in an objects motionsuch as Xander speeding up on his scooteris called acceleration. Acceleration occurs whenever an object is acted upon by an unbalanced force. The greater the net force acting on the object, the greater its acceleration will be, but the mass of the object also affects its acceleration. The smaller its mass is, the greater its acceleration for a given amount of force. Newtons second law of motion summarizes these relationships. According to this law, the acceleration of an object equals the net force acting on it divided by its mass. This can be represented by the equation: Acceleration = Net force Mass or a = F m 	the greater the net force acting on an object the greater its acceleration will be	true
Calculating acceleration is complicated if both speed and direction are changing or if you want to know acceleration at any given instant in time. However, its relatively easy to calculate average acceleration over a period of time when only speed is changing. Then acceleration is the change in velocity (represented by v) divided by the change in time (represented by t): acceleration = v t 	it is easier to calculate acceleration for any given moment of time than to calculate average acceleration for a period of time	false
Starches are complex carbohydrates. They are polymers of glucose. A polymer is a large molecule that consists of many smaller, repeating molecules, called monomers. The monomers are joined together by covalent bonds. Starches contain hundreds of glucose monomers. Plants make starches to store extra glucose. Consumers get starches by eating plants. Common sources of starches in the human diet are pictured in the Figure 1.2. Our digestive system breaks down starches to sugar, which our cells use for energy. 	plants stores extra glucose as starches	true
Cellulose is another complex carbohydrate that is a polymer of glucose. However, glucose molecules are bonded together differently in cellulose than they are in starches. Cellulose molecules bundle together to form long, tough fibers, as you can see in the Figure 1.3. Have you ever eaten raw celery? If you have, then you probably noticed that Foods that are good sources of starches. the stalks contain long, stringy fibers. The fibers are mostly cellulose. Cellulose is the most abundant biochemical compound. It makes up the cell walls of plants and gives support to stems and tree trunks. Cellulose also provides needed fiber in the human diet. We cant digest cellulose, but it helps keep food wastes moving through the digestive tract. 	cellulose is a polymer of starch	false
Carbon is a very common ingredient of matter because it can combine with itself and with many other elements. It can form a great diversity of compounds, ranging in size from just a few atoms to thousands of atoms. There are millions of known carbon compounds, and carbon is the only element that can form so many different compounds. 	about half of all known compounds contain carbon	false
A carbon atom can form covalent bonds with other carbon atoms or with the atoms of other elements. Carbon often forms bonds with hydrogen. Compounds that contain only carbon and hydrogen are called hydrocarbons. Methane (CH4 ), which is modeled in the Figure 1.2, is an example of a hydrocarbon. In methane, a single carbon atom forms covalent bonds with four hydrogen atoms. The diagram on the left in the Figure 1.2 shows all the shared valence electrons. The diagram on the right in the Figure 1.2, called a structural formula, represents each pair of shared electrons with a dash (-). Methane (CH4 ) 	methane is an example of a hydrocarbon	true
Carbon is a very common ingredient of matter because it can combine with itself and with many other elements. It can form a great diversity of compounds, ranging in size from just a few atoms to thousands of atoms. There are millions of known carbon compounds, and carbon is the only element that can form so many different compounds. 	carbon can form more compounds than any other element	true
Synthetic carbon polymers are produced in labs or factories. Plastics are common examples of synthetic carbon polymers. You are probably familiar with the plastic called polyethylene. All of the plastic items pictured in the Figure 1.3 are made of polyethylene. It consists of repeating monomers of ethylene (C2 H4 ). Structural formulas for ethylene and polyethylene are also shown in the Figure 1.4. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	rubber consists of the monomer named ethylene	false
Carbon has a unique ability to form covalent bonds with many other atoms. It can bond with other carbon atoms as well as with atoms of other elements. Because of this ability, carbon often forms polymers. A polymer is a large molecule that is made out of many smaller molecules that are joined together by covalent bonds. The smaller, repeating molecules are called monomers. (The prefix mono- means one and the prefix poly- means many.) Polymers may consist of just one type of monomer or of more than one type. Polymers are similar to the strings of beads pictured in the Figure 1.1. Like beads on a string, monomers in a polymer may be all the same or different from one another. 	any given polymer consists of just one type of monomer	false
A catalyst is a substance that increases the rate of a chemical reaction. The presence of a catalyst is one of several factors that influence the rate of chemical reactions. (Other factors include the temperature, concentration, and surface area of reactants.) A catalyst isnt a reactant in the chemical reaction it speeds up. As a result, it isnt changed or used up in the reaction, so it can go on to catalyze many more reactions. Q: How is a catalyst like a tunnel through a mountain? A: Like a tunnel through a mountain, a catalyst provides a faster pathway for a chemical reaction to occur. 	a catalyst is a reactant in the reaction it catalyzes	false
A catalyst is a substance that increases the rate of a chemical reaction. The presence of a catalyst is one of several factors that influence the rate of chemical reactions. (Other factors include the temperature, concentration, and surface area of reactants.) A catalyst isnt a reactant in the chemical reaction it speeds up. As a result, it isnt changed or used up in the reaction, so it can go on to catalyze many more reactions. Q: How is a catalyst like a tunnel through a mountain? A: Like a tunnel through a mountain, a catalyst provides a faster pathway for a chemical reaction to occur. 	a catalyst is used up in the reaction it catalyzes	false
Chemical reactions constantly occur inside living things. Many of these reactions require catalysts so they will occur quickly enough to support life. Catalysts in living things are called enzymes. Enzymes may be extremely effective. A reaction that takes a split second to occur with an enzyme might take many years without it! More than 1000 different enzymes are necessary for human life. Many enzymes are needed for the digestion of food. An example is amylase, which is found in the mouth and small intestine. Amylase catalyzes the breakdown of starch to sugar. You can see how it affects the rate of starch digestion in the Figure 1.2. A: The starches in the cracker start to break down to sugars with the help of the enzyme amylase. Try this yourself and see if you can taste the reaction. 	more than 1000 different enzymes are necessary for human life	true
A catalyst is a substance that increases the rate of a chemical reaction. The presence of a catalyst is one of several factors that influence the rate of chemical reactions. (Other factors include the temperature, concentration, and surface area of reactants.) A catalyst isnt a reactant in the chemical reaction it speeds up. As a result, it isnt changed or used up in the reaction, so it can go on to catalyze many more reactions. Q: How is a catalyst like a tunnel through a mountain? A: Like a tunnel through a mountain, a catalyst provides a faster pathway for a chemical reaction to occur. 	the presence or absence of a catalyst is the only factor that affects the rate of a chemical reaction	false
Cellular Respiration is the process in which the cells of living things break down the organic compound glucose with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide and water. The overall chemical equation for cellular respiration is: C6 H12 O6 + 6O2  6CO2 + 6H2 O As the Figure 1.1 shows, cellular respiration occurs in the cells of all kinds of organisms, including those that make their own food (autotrophs) as well as those that get their food by consuming other organisms (heterotrophs). Q: How is cellular respiration related to breathing? A: Breathing consists of inhaling and exhaling, and its purpose is to move gases into and out of the body. Oxygen needed for cellular respiration is brought into the body with each inhalation. Carbon dioxide and water vapor produced by cellular respiration are released from the body with each exhalation. 	organisms that make glucose are called autotrophs	true
The reactions of cellular respiration are catabolic reactions. In catabolic reactions, bonds are broken in larger molecules and energy is released. In cellular respiration, bonds are broken in glucose, and this releases the chemical energy that was stored in the glucose bonds. Some of this energy is converted to heat. The rest of the energy is used to form many small molecules of a compound called adenosine triphosphate, or ATP. ATP molecules contain just the right amount of stored chemical energy to power biochemical reactions inside cells. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	cellular respiration takes place only in the cells of heterotrophs	false
The reactions of cellular respiration are catabolic reactions. In catabolic reactions, bonds are broken in larger molecules and energy is released. In cellular respiration, bonds are broken in glucose, and this releases the chemical energy that was stored in the glucose bonds. Some of this energy is converted to heat. The rest of the energy is used to form many small molecules of a compound called adenosine triphosphate, or ATP. ATP molecules contain just the right amount of stored chemical energy to power biochemical reactions inside cells. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the chemical reactions of cellular respiration are anabolic reactions	false
A chemical bond is a force of attraction between atoms or ions. Bonds form when atoms share or transfer valence electrons. Valence electrons are the electrons in the outer energy level of an atom that may be involved in chemical interactions. Valence electrons are the basis of all chemical bonds. Q: Why do you think that chemical bonds form? A: Chemical bonds form because they give atoms a more stable arrangement of electrons. 	valence electrons are the basis of all chemical bonds	true
Not all chemical bonds form in the same way as the bonds in water. There are actually three different types of chemical bonds, called covalent, ionic, and metallic bonds. Each type of bond is described below. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  A covalent bond is the force of attraction that holds together two nonmetal atoms that share a pair of electrons. One electron is provided by each atom, and the pair of electrons is attracted to the positive nuclei of both atoms. The water molecule represented in the Figure 1.1 contains covalent bonds. An ionic bond is the force of attraction that holds together oppositely charged ions. Ionic bonds form crystals instead of molecules. Table salt contains ionic bonds. A metallic bond is the force of attraction between a positive metal ion and the valence electrons that surround itboth its own valence electrons and those of other ions of the same metal. The ions and electrons form a lattice-like structure. Only metals, such as the copper pictured in the Figure 1.2, form metallic bonds. 	an example of a compound that contains ionic bonds is water	false
Not all chemical bonds form in the same way as the bonds in water. There are actually three different types of chemical bonds, called covalent, ionic, and metallic bonds. Each type of bond is described below. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  A covalent bond is the force of attraction that holds together two nonmetal atoms that share a pair of electrons. One electron is provided by each atom, and the pair of electrons is attracted to the positive nuclei of both atoms. The water molecule represented in the Figure 1.1 contains covalent bonds. An ionic bond is the force of attraction that holds together oppositely charged ions. Ionic bonds form crystals instead of molecules. Table salt contains ionic bonds. A metallic bond is the force of attraction between a positive metal ion and the valence electrons that surround itboth its own valence electrons and those of other ions of the same metal. The ions and electrons form a lattice-like structure. Only metals, such as the copper pictured in the Figure 1.2, form metallic bonds. 	metallic bonds form a latticelike structure	true
All chemical equations, like equations in math, must balance. This means that there must be the same number of each type of atom on both sides of the arrow. Thats because matter is always conserved in a chemical reaction. This is the law of conservation of mass. Look at the equation above for the reaction between carbon and oxygen in the formation of carbon dioxide. Count the number of atoms of each type. Are the numbers the same on both sides of the arrow? The answer is yes, so the equation is balanced. 	the substances that form in a chemical reaction are completely different from the substances that start the reaction	true
In a chemical formula, the elements in a compound are represented by their chemical symbols, and the ratio of different elements is represented by subscripts. Consider the compound water as an example. Each water molecule contains two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom. Therefore, the chemical formula for water is: H2 O The subscript 2 after the H shows that there are two atoms of hydrogen in the molecule. The O for oxygen has no subscript. When there is just one atom of an element in a molecule, no subscript is used in the chemical formula. 	a given chemical compound always has exactly the same ratio of elements	true
In a chemical formula, the elements in a compound are represented by their chemical symbols, and the ratio of different elements is represented by subscripts. Consider the compound water as an example. Each water molecule contains two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom. Therefore, the chemical formula for water is: H2 O The subscript 2 after the H shows that there are two atoms of hydrogen in the molecule. The O for oxygen has no subscript. When there is just one atom of an element in a molecule, no subscript is used in the chemical formula. 	in the formula for an ionic compound the negative ion is always written first	false
A chemical reaction is a process in which some substances change into different substances. Substances that start a chemical reaction are called reactants. Substances that are produced in the reaction are called products. Reactants and products can be elements or compounds. Chemical reactions are represented by chemical equations, like the one below, in which reactants (on the left) are connected by an arrow to products (on the right). Reactants  Products Chemical reactions may occur quickly or slowly. Look at the two pictures in the Figure 1.1. Both represent chemical reactions. In the picture on the left, a reaction inside a fire extinguisher causes foam to shoot out of the extinguisher. This reaction occurs almost instantly. In the picture on the right, a reaction causes the iron tool to turn to rust. This reaction occurs very slowly. In fact, it might take many years for all of the iron in the tool to turn to rust. Q: What happens during a chemical reaction? Where do the reactants go, and where do the products come from? A: During a chemical reaction, chemical changes take place. Some chemical bonds break and new chemical bonds form. 	a chemical reaction changes some substances into other substances with different chemical properties	true
A chemical reaction is a process in which some substances change into different substances. Substances that start a chemical reaction are called reactants. Substances that are produced in the reaction are called products. Reactants and products can be elements or compounds. Chemical reactions are represented by chemical equations, like the one below, in which reactants (on the left) are connected by an arrow to products (on the right). Reactants  Products Chemical reactions may occur quickly or slowly. Look at the two pictures in the Figure 1.1. Both represent chemical reactions. In the picture on the left, a reaction inside a fire extinguisher causes foam to shoot out of the extinguisher. This reaction occurs almost instantly. In the picture on the right, a reaction causes the iron tool to turn to rust. This reaction occurs very slowly. In fact, it might take many years for all of the iron in the tool to turn to rust. Q: What happens during a chemical reaction? Where do the reactants go, and where do the products come from? A: During a chemical reaction, chemical changes take place. Some chemical bonds break and new chemical bonds form. 	the substances involved in a chemical reaction may be elements or compounds	true
When a solid substance is involved in a chemical reaction, only the matter at the surface of the solid is exposed to other reactants. If a solid has more surface area, more of it is exposed and able to react. Therefore, increasing the surface area of solid reactants increases the reaction rate. Look at the hammer and nails pictured in the Figure 1.3. Both are made of iron and will rust when the iron combines with oxygen in the air. However, the nails have a greater surface area, so they will rust faster. 	warmer reactants react more quickly than cooler reactants	true
When the temperature of reactants is higher, the rate of the reaction is faster. At higher temperatures, particles of reactants have more energy, so they move faster. As a result, they are more likely to bump into one another and to collide with greater force. For example, food spoils because of chemical reactions, and these reactions occur faster at higher temperatures (see the bread on the left in the Figure 1.1). This is why we store foods in the refrigerator or freezer (like the bread on the right in the Figure 1.1). The lower temperature slows the rate of spoilage. Left image: Bread after 1 month on a warm countertop. Right image: Bread after 1 month in a cold refrigerator. 	food spoils faster at higher temperatures because heat is a catalyst	false
When the temperature of reactants is higher, the rate of the reaction is faster. At higher temperatures, particles of reactants have more energy, so they move faster. As a result, they are more likely to bump into one another and to collide with greater force. For example, food spoils because of chemical reactions, and these reactions occur faster at higher temperatures (see the bread on the left in the Figure 1.1). This is why we store foods in the refrigerator or freezer (like the bread on the right in the Figure 1.1). The lower temperature slows the rate of spoilage. Left image: Bread after 1 month on a warm countertop. Right image: Bread after 1 month in a cold refrigerator. 	warmer reactants have more energy and move faster	true
A compound is a unique substance that forms when two or more elements combine chemically. Compounds form as a result of chemical reactions. The elements in compounds are held together by chemical bonds. A chemical bond is a force of attraction between atoms or ions that share or transfer valence electrons. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Water is an example of a common chemical compound. As you can see in the Figure 1.1, each water molecule consists of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen. Water always has this 2:1 ratio of hydrogen to oxygen. Like water, all compounds consist of a fixed ratio of elements. It doesnt matter how much or how little of a compound there is. It always has the same composition. Q: Sometimes the same elements combine in different ratios. How can this happen if a compound always consists of the same elements in the same ratio? A: If the same elements combine in different ratios, they form different compounds. 	all compounds consist of a fixed ratio of elements	true
There are two basic types of compounds that differ in the nature of the bonds that hold their atoms or ions together. They are covalent and ionic compounds. Both types are described below. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Covalent compounds consist of atoms that are held together by covalent bonds. These bonds form between nonmetals that share valence electrons. Covalent compounds exist as individual molecules. Water is an example of a covalent compound. Ionic compounds consist of ions that are held together by ionic bonds. These bonds form when metals transfer electrons to nonmetals. Ionic compounds exist as a matrix of many ions, called a crystal. Sodium chloride (table salt) is an example of an ionic compound. 	water is an example of a covalent compound	true
There are two basic types of compounds that differ in the nature of the bonds that hold their atoms or ions together. They are covalent and ionic compounds. Both types are described below. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Covalent compounds consist of atoms that are held together by covalent bonds. These bonds form between nonmetals that share valence electrons. Covalent compounds exist as individual molecules. Water is an example of a covalent compound. Ionic compounds consist of ions that are held together by ionic bonds. These bonds form when metals transfer electrons to nonmetals. Ionic compounds exist as a matrix of many ions, called a crystal. Sodium chloride (table salt) is an example of an ionic compound. 	carbon dioxide is an example of an ionic compound	false
Visible light is light that has wavelengths that can be detected by the human eye. The wavelength of visible light determines the color that the light appears. As you can see in the Figure 1.1, light with the longest wavelength appears red, and light with the shortest wavelength appears violet. In between are all the other colors of light that we can see. Only seven main colors of light are actually represented in the diagram. 	a rainbow includes all the colors of visible light	true
Visible light is light that has wavelengths that can be detected by the human eye. The wavelength of visible light determines the color that the light appears. As you can see in the Figure 1.1, light with the longest wavelength appears red, and light with the shortest wavelength appears violet. In between are all the other colors of light that we can see. Only seven main colors of light are actually represented in the diagram. 	visible light includes all the wavelengths of light that the human eye can detect	true
You have probably heard of the famous equation E = mc2 . The "E" represent the amount of energy. The "m" represents mass. The "c" represent the speed of light. Writing a "c" is much easier than writing the actual speed of light. The speed of light is a really large number. The speed of light is about 300 million meters per second. Thats really, really fast. Light always travels at the same speed through space. In outer space, there is not any matter to get in its way. Think about riding your bicycle. When you ride on a hard surface, it is easy to pedal. You can go really fast. Imagine how your speed would change if you were riding through deep sand. You would find it hard to pedal. You would not be able to go as fast. The same is true for light. When there is no matter around, like in outer space, it can go fast. When matter gets in its way, it slows down. Light travels through some matter faster than through others. Table 1.1 gives the speed of light in six common materials. Material Air Water Glass Vegetable oil Alcohol Diamond Speed of Light (m/s) 299 million meters per second 231 million meters per second 200 million meters per second 150 million meters per second 140 million meters per second 125 million meters per second No matter how slow light travels, it still goes really, really fast. The important thing to remember is that it does travel. It is hard for us to imagine light taking time to cover a distance. Think about when you enter your science classroom. You step through the door. You tell your teacher, "Hello." You walk to your desk and sit down. It may take around 10 to 20 seconds to walk this distance. Imagine now your teacher turns the light off. She carries a small lamp over to the door you just entered. She asks you to watch carefully as she switches on the light. She flips the switch and you immediately see the light. The light just covered the same distance you just walked. Thats how fast light is. For us, it is hard to imagine that it moves. Now lets think about light traveling between the Sun and Earth. The Sun is 93 million miles away. What if we were able to turn off the Sun for just a second? How long would it take us to notice? Would we notice instantly like in the classroom? Remember, the Sun is a long way away. We wouldnt notice the change for a little over 8 minutes. That is because the Sun is a long way away. Even when moving as fast as light, it takes time to travel from the Sun to Earth. What do you think happens when it hits the air in our atmosphere? Air is made up of matter. When light travels through matter it slows down. How do scientists know it slows down? What evidence do scientists have? When sunlight hits Earths atmosphere it bends just a little. If sunlight goes through water droplets it bends even more. The bending of light through droplets of water is why we can see rainbows. It also explains why the straw in a glass of water appears to be broken. 	the net force acting on you when you sit still in a chair is zero	true
You have probably heard of the famous equation E = mc2 . The "E" represent the amount of energy. The "m" represents mass. The "c" represent the speed of light. Writing a "c" is much easier than writing the actual speed of light. The speed of light is a really large number. The speed of light is about 300 million meters per second. Thats really, really fast. Light always travels at the same speed through space. In outer space, there is not any matter to get in its way. Think about riding your bicycle. When you ride on a hard surface, it is easy to pedal. You can go really fast. Imagine how your speed would change if you were riding through deep sand. You would find it hard to pedal. You would not be able to go as fast. The same is true for light. When there is no matter around, like in outer space, it can go fast. When matter gets in its way, it slows down. Light travels through some matter faster than through others. Table 1.1 gives the speed of light in six common materials. Material Air Water Glass Vegetable oil Alcohol Diamond Speed of Light (m/s) 299 million meters per second 231 million meters per second 200 million meters per second 150 million meters per second 140 million meters per second 125 million meters per second No matter how slow light travels, it still goes really, really fast. The important thing to remember is that it does travel. It is hard for us to imagine light taking time to cover a distance. Think about when you enter your science classroom. You step through the door. You tell your teacher, "Hello." You walk to your desk and sit down. It may take around 10 to 20 seconds to walk this distance. Imagine now your teacher turns the light off. She carries a small lamp over to the door you just entered. She asks you to watch carefully as she switches on the light. She flips the switch and you immediately see the light. The light just covered the same distance you just walked. Thats how fast light is. For us, it is hard to imagine that it moves. Now lets think about light traveling between the Sun and Earth. The Sun is 93 million miles away. What if we were able to turn off the Sun for just a second? How long would it take us to notice? Would we notice instantly like in the classroom? Remember, the Sun is a long way away. We wouldnt notice the change for a little over 8 minutes. That is because the Sun is a long way away. Even when moving as fast as light, it takes time to travel from the Sun to Earth. What do you think happens when it hits the air in our atmosphere? Air is made up of matter. When light travels through matter it slows down. How do scientists know it slows down? What evidence do scientists have? When sunlight hits Earths atmosphere it bends just a little. If sunlight goes through water droplets it bends even more. The bending of light through droplets of water is why we can see rainbows. It also explains why the straw in a glass of water appears to be broken. 	when two forces act on the same object in opposite directions the net force is always greater than the individual forces	false
When light passes from one medium (or type of matter) to another, it changes speed. You can actually see this happen. If light strikes a new substance at an angle, the light appears to bend. This is what explains the straw looking broken in the picture above. So, does light always bend as it travels into a new medium? If light travels straight into a new substance it is not bent. You may know this angle as perpendicular. The light still slows down, just does not appear to bend. Any angle other than perpendicular the light will bend as it slows down. The bending of light is called refraction. Figure 1.1 shows how refraction occurs. Notice that the angle of light changes again as it passes from the glass back to the air. In this case, the speed increases, and the ray of light resumes its initial direction. For a more detailed explanation of refraction, watch this video: Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	when two forces act on the same object in the same direction the net force is always less than the individual forces	false
The fuel that burns in a combustion reaction contains compounds called hydrocarbons. Hydrocarbons are compounds that contain only carbon (C) and hydrogen (H). The charcoal pictured in the Figure 1.1 consists of hydrocarbons. So do fossil fuels such as natural gas. Natural gas is a fuel that is commonly used in home furnaces and gas stoves. The main component of natural gas is the hydrocarbon called methane (CH4 ). You can see a methane flame in the Figure 1.2. The combustion of methane is represented by the equation: CH4 + 2O2  CO2 + 2H2 O The combustion of methane gas heats a pot on a stove. Q: Sometimes the flame on a gas stove isnt just blue but has some yellow or orange in it. Why might this occur? A: If the flame isnt just blue, the methane isnt getting enough oxygen to burn completely, leaving some of the carbon unburned. The flame will also not be as hot as a completely blue flame for the same reason. 	the main component of natural gas is nitrogen	false
A combustion reaction occurs when a substance reacts quickly with oxygen (O2 ). For example, in the Figure usually referred to as fuel. The products of a complete combustion reaction include carbon dioxide (CO2 ) and water vapor (H2 O). The reaction typically gives off heat and light as well. The general equation for a complete combustion reaction is: Fuel + O2  CO2 + H2 O The burning of charcoal is a combustion reaction. 	products of incomplete combustion include only carbon dioxide and water	false
A compound machine is a machine that consists of more than one simple machine. Some compound machines consist of just two simple machines. You can read below about two examplesthe wheelbarrow and corkscrew. Other compound machines, such as bicycles, consist of many simple machines. Big compound machines such as cars may consist of hundreds or even thousands of simple machines. 	some compound machines consist of thousands of simple machines	true
Friction is a force that opposes motion between any surfaces that are touching. All machines have moving parts and friction, so they have to use some of the work that is applied to them to overcome friction. This makes all machines less than 100 percent efficient. Because compound machines have more moving parts than simple machines, they generally have more friction to overcome. As a result, compound machines tend to have lower efficiency than simple machines. When a compound machine consists of many simple machines, friction can become a serious problem, and it may produce a lot of heat. Lubricants such as oil or grease may be used to coat the moving parts of a machine so they slide over each other more easily. This is how friction is reduced in a car engine. 	all machines must overcome friction	true
Friction is a force that opposes motion between any surfaces that are touching. All machines have moving parts and friction, so they have to use some of the work that is applied to them to overcome friction. This makes all machines less than 100 percent efficient. Because compound machines have more moving parts than simple machines, they generally have more friction to overcome. As a result, compound machines tend to have lower efficiency than simple machines. When a compound machine consists of many simple machines, friction can become a serious problem, and it may produce a lot of heat. Lubricants such as oil or grease may be used to coat the moving parts of a machine so they slide over each other more easily. This is how friction is reduced in a car engine. 	no machine is 100 percent efficient	true
A compound is a unique substance that forms when two or more elements combine chemically. For example, the compound carbon dioxide forms when one atom of carbon (grey in the model above) combines with two atoms of oxygen (red in the model). Another example of a compound is water. It forms when two hydrogen atoms combine with one oxygen atom. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Q: How could a water molecule be represented? A: It could be represented by a model like the one for carbon dioxide in the opening image. You can see a sample Figure 1.1. A model of water. Two things are true of all compounds: A compound always has the same elements in the same proportions. For example, carbon dioxide always has two atoms of oxygen for each atom of carbon, and water always has two atoms of hydrogen for each atom of oxygen. A compound always has the same composition throughout. For example, all the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and all the water in the ocean have these same proportions of elements. Q: How do you think the properties of compounds compare with the properties of the elements that form them? A: You might expect the properties of a compound to be similar to the properties of the elements that make up the compound. But you would be wrong. 	a compound always has the same elements in the same proportions	true
The properties of compounds are different from the properties of the elements that form themsometimes very different. Thats because elements in a compound combine and become an entirely different substance with its own unique properties. Do you put salt on your food? Table salt is the compound sodium chloride. It contains sodium and chlorine. As shown in the Figure 1.2, sodium is a solid that reacts explosively with water, and chlorine is a poisonous gas. But together in table salt, sodium and chlorine form a harmless unreactive compound that you can safely eat. Q: The compound sodium chloride is very different from the elements sodium and chlorine that combine to form it. What are some properties of sodium chloride? A: Sodium chloride is an odorless white solid that is harmless unless consumed in large quantities. In fact, it is a necessary component of the human diet. 	the properties of compounds are the same as the properties of the elements that form them	false
Compounds like sodium chloride form structures called crystals. A crystal is a rigid framework of many ions locked together in a repeating pattern. Ions are electrically charged forms of atoms. You can see a crystal of sodium chloride in the Figure 1.3. It is made up of many sodium and chloride ions. Sodium and chlorine combine to form sodium chloride, or table salt. A sodium chloride crystal consists of many sodium ions (blue) and chloride ions (green) arranged in a rigid framework. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Compounds such as carbon dioxide and water form molecules instead of crystals. A molecule is the smallest particle of a compound that still has the compounds properties. It consists of two or more atoms bonded together. You saw models of carbon dioxide and water molecules above. 	a molecule consists of two or more atoms bonded together	true
All chemical reactions involve energy. Energy is used to break bonds in reactants, and energy is released when new bonds form in products. Like the combustion reaction in a furnace, some chemical reactions require less energy to break bonds in reactants than is released when bonds form in products. These reactions, called exothermic reactions, release energy. In other chemical reactions, it takes more energy to break bonds in reactants than is released when bonds form in products. These reactions, called endothermic reactions, absorb energy. 	energy cannot be created or destroyed in chemical reactions	true
All chemical reactions involve energy. Energy is used to break bonds in reactants, and energy is released when new bonds form in products. Like the combustion reaction in a furnace, some chemical reactions require less energy to break bonds in reactants than is released when bonds form in products. These reactions, called exothermic reactions, release energy. In other chemical reactions, it takes more energy to break bonds in reactants than is released when bonds form in products. These reactions, called endothermic reactions, absorb energy. 	energy cannot change form during chemical reactions	false
All chemical reactions involve energy. Energy is used to break bonds in reactants, and energy is released when new bonds form in products. Like the combustion reaction in a furnace, some chemical reactions require less energy to break bonds in reactants than is released when bonds form in products. These reactions, called exothermic reactions, release energy. In other chemical reactions, it takes more energy to break bonds in reactants than is released when bonds form in products. These reactions, called endothermic reactions, absorb energy. 	in an endothermic reaction products have less chemical energy than reactants	false
Einsteins equation helps scientists understand what happens in nuclear reactions and why they produce so much energy. When the nucleus of a radioisotope undergoes fission or fusion in a nuclear reaction, it loses a tiny amount of mass. What happens to the lost mass? It isnt really lost at all. It is converted to energy. How much energy? E = mc2 . The change in mass is tiny, but it results in a great deal of energy. Q: In a nuclear reaction, mass decreases and energy increases. What about the laws of conservation of mass and conservation of energy? Are mass and energy not conserved in nuclear reactions? Do we need to throw out these laws when it comes to nuclear reactions? A: No, the laws still apply. However, its more correct to say that the sum of mass and energy is always conserved in a nuclear reaction. Mass changes to energy, but the total amount of mass and energy combined remains the same. 	the letter c in the equation in question 1 represents a constant	true
Einsteins equation is possibly the best-known equation of all time. Theres reason for that. The equation is incredibly important. It changed how scientists view energy and matter, which are two of the most basic concepts in all of science. The equation shows that energy and matter are two forms of the same thing. This new idea turned science upside down when Einstein introduced it in the early 1900s. Amazingly, the idea has withstood the test of time as more and more evidence has been gathered to support it. You can listen to an explanation of Einsteins equation at URL: https://youtu.be/hW7DW9NIO9M Q: What do the letters in Einsteins equation stand for? A: E stands for energy, m stands for mass, and c stands for the speed of light. The speed of light is 300,000 kilometers (186,000 miles) per second, so c2 is a very big number. Therefore, the amount of energy in even a small mass of matter is tremendous. Suppose, for example, that you have 1 gram of matter. Thats about the mass of a paperclip. Multiplying this mass by c2 would yield enough energy to power 3,600 homes for a year! 	the speed of light is 300000 km per hour	false
Einsteins equation is possibly the best-known equation of all time. Theres reason for that. The equation is incredibly important. It changed how scientists view energy and matter, which are two of the most basic concepts in all of science. The equation shows that energy and matter are two forms of the same thing. This new idea turned science upside down when Einstein introduced it in the early 1900s. Amazingly, the idea has withstood the test of time as more and more evidence has been gathered to support it. You can listen to an explanation of Einsteins equation at URL: https://youtu.be/hW7DW9NIO9M Q: What do the letters in Einsteins equation stand for? A: E stands for energy, m stands for mass, and c stands for the speed of light. The speed of light is 300,000 kilometers (186,000 miles) per second, so c2 is a very big number. Therefore, the amount of energy in even a small mass of matter is tremendous. Suppose, for example, that you have 1 gram of matter. Thats about the mass of a paperclip. Multiplying this mass by c2 would yield enough energy to power 3,600 homes for a year! 	einsteins equation has recently been disproven by realworld evidence	false
Einsteins equation helps scientists understand what happens in nuclear reactions and why they produce so much energy. When the nucleus of a radioisotope undergoes fission or fusion in a nuclear reaction, it loses a tiny amount of mass. What happens to the lost mass? It isnt really lost at all. It is converted to energy. How much energy? E = mc2 . The change in mass is tiny, but it results in a great deal of energy. Q: In a nuclear reaction, mass decreases and energy increases. What about the laws of conservation of mass and conservation of energy? Are mass and energy not conserved in nuclear reactions? Do we need to throw out these laws when it comes to nuclear reactions? A: No, the laws still apply. However, its more correct to say that the sum of mass and energy is always conserved in a nuclear reaction. Mass changes to energy, but the total amount of mass and energy combined remains the same. 	the amount of energy in a tiny amount of mass is very large	true
Einsteins equation helps scientists understand what happens in nuclear reactions and why they produce so much energy. When the nucleus of a radioisotope undergoes fission or fusion in a nuclear reaction, it loses a tiny amount of mass. What happens to the lost mass? It isnt really lost at all. It is converted to energy. How much energy? E = mc2 . The change in mass is tiny, but it results in a great deal of energy. Q: In a nuclear reaction, mass decreases and energy increases. What about the laws of conservation of mass and conservation of energy? Are mass and energy not conserved in nuclear reactions? Do we need to throw out these laws when it comes to nuclear reactions? A: No, the laws still apply. However, its more correct to say that the sum of mass and energy is always conserved in a nuclear reaction. Mass changes to energy, but the total amount of mass and energy combined remains the same. 	einsteins equation shows that mass and energy are not conserved in nuclear reactions	false
Why must chemical equations be balanced? Its the law! Matter cannot be created or destroyed in chemical reactions. This is the law of conservation of mass. In every chemical reaction, the same mass of matter must end up in the products as started in the reactants. Balanced chemical equations show that mass is conserved in chemical reactions. 	chemical reactions are represented by chemical formulas	false
A chemical reaction occurs when some substances change chemically to other substances. Chemical reactions are represented by chemical equations. Consider a simple chemical reaction, the burning of methane. In this reaction, methane (CH4 ) combines with oxygen (O2 ) in the air and produces carbon dioxide (CO2 ) and water vapor (H2 O). The reaction is represented by the following chemical equation: CH4 + 2O2  CO2 + 2H2 O This equation shows that one molecule of methane combines with two molecules of oxygen to produce one molecule of carbon dioxide and two molecules of water vapor. All chemical equations must be balanced. This means that the same number of each type of atom must appear on both sides of the arrow. Q: Is the chemical equation for the burning of methane balanced? Count the atoms of each type on both sides of the arrow to find out. A: Yes, the equation is balanced. There is one carbon atom on both sides of the arrow. There are also four hydrogen atoms and four oxygen atoms on both sides of the arrow. 	the equation h2  o2  h2o is balanced	false
Convection is the transfer of thermal energy by particles moving through a fluid (either a gas or a liquid). Thermal energy is the total kinetic energy of moving particles of matter, and the transfer of thermal energy is called heat. Convection is one of three ways that thermal energy can be transferred (the other ways are conduction and thermal radiation). Thermal energy is always transferred from matter with a higher temperature to matter with a lower temperature. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	heat is the transfer of thermal energy	true
Convection is the transfer of thermal energy by particles moving through a fluid (either a gas or a liquid). Thermal energy is the total kinetic energy of moving particles of matter, and the transfer of thermal energy is called heat. Convection is one of three ways that thermal energy can be transferred (the other ways are conduction and thermal radiation). Thermal energy is always transferred from matter with a higher temperature to matter with a lower temperature. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	when particles are more spread out they have higher density	false
Convection is the transfer of thermal energy by particles moving through a fluid (either a gas or a liquid). Thermal energy is the total kinetic energy of moving particles of matter, and the transfer of thermal energy is called heat. Convection is one of three ways that thermal energy can be transferred (the other ways are conduction and thermal radiation). Thermal energy is always transferred from matter with a higher temperature to matter with a lower temperature. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	higher density particles sink downward through a fluid	true
A refrigerator must do work to reverse the normal direction of thermal energy flow. Work involves the use of force to move something, and doing work takes energy. In a refrigerator, the energy is usually provided by electricity. You can read in detail in the Figure 1.1 how a refrigerator does its work. 	most cooling systems get energy from electricity	true
The key to how a refrigerator or other cooling system works is the refrigerant. A refrigerant is a substance such as FreonTM that has a low boiling point and changes between liquid and gaseous states as it passes through the refrigerator. As a liquid, the refrigerant absorbs thermal energy from the cool air inside the refrigerator and changes to a gas. As a gas, it transfers thermal energy to the warm air outside the refrigerator and changes back to a liquid. Work is done by a refrigerator to move the refrigerant through the different components of the refrigerator. 	the refrigerant changes between solid and liquid states as it passes through the refrigerator	false
The key to how a refrigerator or other cooling system works is the refrigerant. A refrigerant is a substance such as FreonTM that has a low boiling point and changes between liquid and gaseous states as it passes through the refrigerator. As a liquid, the refrigerant absorbs thermal energy from the cool air inside the refrigerator and changes to a gas. As a gas, it transfers thermal energy to the warm air outside the refrigerator and changes back to a liquid. Work is done by a refrigerator to move the refrigerant through the different components of the refrigerator. 	as a liquid the refrigerant transfers thermal energy to the outside air	false
A covalent bond is the force of attraction that holds together two atoms that share a pair of valence electrons. The shared electrons are attracted to the nuclei of both atoms. This forms a molecule consisting of two or more atoms. Covalent bonds form only between atoms of nonmetals. 	electrons in covalent bonds are attracted to the nucleus of just one atom	false
A covalent bond is the force of attraction that holds together two atoms that share a pair of valence electrons. The shared electrons are attracted to the nuclei of both atoms. This forms a molecule consisting of two or more atoms. Covalent bonds form only between atoms of nonmetals. 	a covalent bond always includes a pair of electrons	true
A covalent bond is the force of attraction that holds together two atoms that share a pair of valence electrons. The shared electrons are attracted to the nuclei of both atoms. This forms a molecule consisting of two or more atoms. Covalent bonds form only between atoms of nonmetals. 	the formation of one or more covalent bonds always results in a covalent compound	false
A fullerene (also called a Bucky ball) is a form of carbon in which carbon atoms are arranged in a hollow sphere resembling a soccer ball (see Figure 1.4). Each sphere contains 60 carbon atoms, and each carbon atom is bonded to three others by single covalent bonds. The bonds are relatively weak, so fullerenes can dissolve and form solutions. Fullerenes were first discovered in 1985 and have been found in soot and meteorites. Possible commercial uses of fullerenes are under investigation. Fullerene Crystal 	the form of carbon in question 6 has been found in meteorites	true
A fullerene (also called a Bucky ball) is a form of carbon in which carbon atoms are arranged in a hollow sphere resembling a soccer ball (see Figure 1.4). Each sphere contains 60 carbon atoms, and each carbon atom is bonded to three others by single covalent bonds. The bonds are relatively weak, so fullerenes can dissolve and form solutions. Fullerenes were first discovered in 1985 and have been found in soot and meteorites. Possible commercial uses of fullerenes are under investigation. Fullerene Crystal 	fullerenes are used to make soccer balls	false
From his research, Dalton developed a theory about atoms. Daltons atomic theory consists of three basic ideas: All substances are made of atoms. Atoms are the smallest particles of matter. They cannot be divided into smaller particles, created, or destroyed. All atoms of the same element are alike and have the same mass. Atoms of different elements are different and have different masses. Atoms join together to form compounds, and a given compound always consists of the same kinds of atoms in the same proportions. Daltons atomic theory was accepted by many scientists almost immediately. Most of it is still accepted today. However, scientists now know that atoms are not the smallest particles of matter. Atoms consist of several types of smaller particles, including protons, neutrons, and electrons. 	scientists now reject most of daltons atomic theory	false
From his research, Dalton developed a theory about atoms. Daltons atomic theory consists of three basic ideas: All substances are made of atoms. Atoms are the smallest particles of matter. They cannot be divided into smaller particles, created, or destroyed. All atoms of the same element are alike and have the same mass. Atoms of different elements are different and have different masses. Atoms join together to form compounds, and a given compound always consists of the same kinds of atoms in the same proportions. Daltons atomic theory was accepted by many scientists almost immediately. Most of it is still accepted today. However, scientists now know that atoms are not the smallest particles of matter. Atoms consist of several types of smaller particles, including protons, neutrons, and electrons. 	dalton based his ideas about atoms on his own scientific research	true
From his research, Dalton developed a theory about atoms. Daltons atomic theory consists of three basic ideas: All substances are made of atoms. Atoms are the smallest particles of matter. They cannot be divided into smaller particles, created, or destroyed. All atoms of the same element are alike and have the same mass. Atoms of different elements are different and have different masses. Atoms join together to form compounds, and a given compound always consists of the same kinds of atoms in the same proportions. Daltons atomic theory was accepted by many scientists almost immediately. Most of it is still accepted today. However, scientists now know that atoms are not the smallest particles of matter. Atoms consist of several types of smaller particles, including protons, neutrons, and electrons. 	dalton thought that atoms consist of smaller particles of matter	false
From his research, Dalton developed a theory about atoms. Daltons atomic theory consists of three basic ideas: All substances are made of atoms. Atoms are the smallest particles of matter. They cannot be divided into smaller particles, created, or destroyed. All atoms of the same element are alike and have the same mass. Atoms of different elements are different and have different masses. Atoms join together to form compounds, and a given compound always consists of the same kinds of atoms in the same proportions. Daltons atomic theory was accepted by many scientists almost immediately. Most of it is still accepted today. However, scientists now know that atoms are not the smallest particles of matter. Atoms consist of several types of smaller particles, including protons, neutrons, and electrons. 	daltons atomic theory was quickly accepted by most other scientists	true
From his research, Dalton developed a theory about atoms. Daltons atomic theory consists of three basic ideas: All substances are made of atoms. Atoms are the smallest particles of matter. They cannot be divided into smaller particles, created, or destroyed. All atoms of the same element are alike and have the same mass. Atoms of different elements are different and have different masses. Atoms join together to form compounds, and a given compound always consists of the same kinds of atoms in the same proportions. Daltons atomic theory was accepted by many scientists almost immediately. Most of it is still accepted today. However, scientists now know that atoms are not the smallest particles of matter. Atoms consist of several types of smaller particles, including protons, neutrons, and electrons. 	dalton thought that a given compound always consists of the same kinds of atoms in the same proportions	true
A low level of radiation occurs naturally in the environment. This is called background radiation. One source of background radiation is rocks, which may contain small amounts of radioactive elements such as uranium. Another source is cosmic rays. These are charged particles that arrive on Earth from outer space. Background radiation is generally considered to be safe for living things. 	there is a low level of natural radiation in the environment	true
A low level of radiation occurs naturally in the environment. This is called background radiation. One source of background radiation is rocks, which may contain small amounts of radioactive elements such as uranium. Another source is cosmic rays. These are charged particles that arrive on Earth from outer space. Background radiation is generally considered to be safe for living things. 	background radiation is generally considered harmful to living things	false
A low level of radiation occurs naturally in the environment. This is called background radiation. One source of background radiation is rocks, which may contain small amounts of radioactive elements such as uranium. Another source is cosmic rays. These are charged particles that arrive on Earth from outer space. Background radiation is generally considered to be safe for living things. 	only living things can be harmed by radiation	false
A decomposition reaction occurs when one reactant breaks down into two or more products. It can be represented by the general equation: AB  A + B In this equation, AB represents the reactant that begins the reaction, and A and B represent the products of the reaction. The arrow shows the direction in which the reaction occurs. Q: What is the chemical equation for the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide (H2 O2 ) to water (H2 O) and oxygen (O2 )? A: The equation for this decomposition reaction is: 2 H2 O2  2 H2 O + O2 	products of decomposition reactions are always individual elements	false
A decomposition reaction occurs when one reactant breaks down into two or more products. It can be represented by the general equation: AB  A + B In this equation, AB represents the reactant that begins the reaction, and A and B represent the products of the reaction. The arrow shows the direction in which the reaction occurs. Q: What is the chemical equation for the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide (H2 O2 ) to water (H2 O) and oxygen (O2 )? A: The equation for this decomposition reaction is: 2 H2 O2  2 H2 O + O2 	the reaction 2al2o3  4al  3o2 is a decomposition reaction	true
Did you ever notice dust motes moving in still air where a beam of sunlight passes through it? You can see an example in the forest scene in the Figure 1.2. This sort of observation gave Democritus the idea that atoms are in constant, random motion. If this were true, Democritus thought, then atoms must always be bumping into each other. When they do, he surmised, they either bounce apart or stick together to form clumps of atoms. Eventually, the clumps could grow big enough to be visible matter. Q: Which modern theory of matter is similar to Democritus ideas about the motion of atoms? A: The modern kinetic theory of matter is remarkably similar to Democritus ideas about the motion of atoms. According to this theory, atoms of matter are in constant random motion. This motion is greater in gases than in liquids, and it is greater in liquids than in solids. But even in solids, atoms are constantly vibrating in place. 	democritus thought that atoms are motionless	false
Democritus idea of the atom has been called the best guess in antiquity. Thats because it was correct in many ways, yet it was based on pure speculation. It really was just a guess. Heres what Democritus thought about the atom: How many times could you cut this piece of cheese in half? How small would the smallest pieces be? All matter consists of atoms, which cannot be further subdivided into smaller particles. Atoms are extremely smalltoo small to see. Atoms are solid particles that are indestructible. Atoms are separated from one another by emptiness, or void. Q: How are Democrituss ideas about atoms similar to modern ideas about atoms? A: Modern ideas agree that all matter is made up of extremely small building blocks called atoms. Q: How are Democrituss ideas different from modern ideas? A: Although atoms are extremely small, it is now possible to see them with very powerful microscopes. Atoms also arent the solid, uncuttable particles Democritus thought. Instead, they consist of several kinds of smaller, simpler particles as well as a lot of empty space. In addition, atoms arent really indestructible because they can be changed to other forms of matter or energy. 	democritus thought that atoms are separated from each other by empty space	true
Democritus was an important philosopher, but he was less influential than another Greek philosopher named Aristo- tle, who lived about 100 years after Democritus. Aristotle rejected Democritus idea of the atom. In fact, Aristotle thought the idea was ridiculous. Unfortunately, Aristotles opinion was accepted for more than 2000 years, and Democritus idea was more or less forgotten. However, the idea of the atom was revived around 1800 by the English scientist John Dalton. Dalton developed an entire theory about the atom, much of which is still accepted today. He based his theory on experimental evidence, not on lucky guesses. 	democritus ideas were based on experimental evidence	false
Many samples have a lot of variation in measurements. Variation can be described with a statistic called the range. The range is the total spread of values in a sample. It is calculated by subtracting the smallest value from the largest value. Q: What is the range of heights in the sample of children in the previous question? A: The range is 62 cm - 54 cm = 8 cm. 	the mean and median of the same set of values are always the same	false
The central tendency of a sample can be represented by the mean, median, or mode. The mean is the average value. It is calculated by adding the individual measurements and dividing the sum by the total number of measurements. The median is the middle value. To find the median, rank all the measurements from smallest to largest and then find the measurement that is in the middle. The mode is the most common value. It is the value that occurs most often. Q: A sample of five children have the following heights: 60 cm, 58 cm, 54 cm, 62 cm, and 58 cm. What are the mean, median, and mode of this sample? A: The mean is (60 cm + 58 cm + 54 cm + 62 cm + 58 cm)  5 = 58 cm. The median and mode are both 58 cm as well. The mean, median, and mode are not always the same, as they are for this sample. In fact, sometimes these three statistics are very different from one another for the same sample. 	the average of a set of values is also called the mode	false
When both distance and direction are considered, motion can be represented by a vector. A vector is a measurement that has both size and direction. It may be represented by an arrow. If you are representing motion with an arrow, the length of the arrow represents distance, and the way the arrow points represents direction. The red arrows on the map in the Figure 1.1 are vectors for Jordans route from his house to the school and from the school to the post office. Q: How would you draw arrows to represent the distances and directions from the post office to the park on the map in the Figure 1.1? A: The vectors would look like this: 	the direction of motion is a vector	false
Distance is the length of the route between two points. The distance of a race, for example, is the length of the track between the starting and finishing lines. In a 100-meter sprint, that distance is 100 meters. 	a millimeter is longer than a centimeter	false
The SI unit for distance is the meter (m). Short distances may be measured in centimeters (cm), and long distances may be measured in kilometers (km). For example, you might measure the distance from the bottom to the top of a sheet of paper in centimeters and the distance from your house to your school in kilometers. 	to measure distance in si units you could use a meter stick	true
As the car approaches listener A, the sound waves get closer together, increasing their frequency. This listener hears the pitch of the siren get higher. As the car speeds away from listener B, the sound waves get farther apart, decreasing their frequency. This listener hears the pitch of the siren get lower. Q: What will the siren sound like to listener A after the police car passes him? A: The siren will suddenly get lower in pitch because the sound waves will be much more spread out and have a lower frequency. 	sound waves from a police car siren move away from the car in all directions	true
As the car approaches listener A, the sound waves get closer together, increasing their frequency. This listener hears the pitch of the siren get higher. As the car speeds away from listener B, the sound waves get farther apart, decreasing their frequency. This listener hears the pitch of the siren get lower. Q: What will the siren sound like to listener A after the police car passes him? A: The siren will suddenly get lower in pitch because the sound waves will be much more spread out and have a lower frequency. 	sound waves that are closer together have a lower frequency	false
As the car approaches listener A, the sound waves get closer together, increasing their frequency. This listener hears the pitch of the siren get higher. As the car speeds away from listener B, the sound waves get farther apart, decreasing their frequency. This listener hears the pitch of the siren get lower. Q: What will the siren sound like to listener A after the police car passes him? A: The siren will suddenly get lower in pitch because the sound waves will be much more spread out and have a lower frequency. 	as the frequency of sound waves gets lower a listener perceives the sound to have a higher pitch	false
Imagine a huge bar magnet passing through Earths axis, as in the Figure 1.1. This is a good representation of Earth as a magnet. Like a bar magnet, Earth has north and south magnetic poles. A magnetic pole is the north or south end of a magnet, where the magnet exerts the most force. 	earth has two north poles and two south poles	true
Although the needle of a compass always points north, it doesnt point to Earths north geographic pole. Find the north geographic pole in the Figure 1.2. As you can see, it is located at 90 north latitude. Where does a compass Q: The north end of a compass needle points toward Earths north magnetic pole. The like poles of two magnets repel each other, and the opposite poles attract. So why doesnt the north end of a compass needle point to Earths south magnetic pole instead? A: The answer may surprise you. The compass needle actually does point to the south pole of magnet Earth. However, it is called the north magnetic pole because it is close to the north geographic pole. This naming convention was adopted a long time ago to avoid confusion. 	a compass needle always points to earths geographic north pole	false
Although the needle of a compass always points north, it doesnt point to Earths north geographic pole. Find the north geographic pole in the Figure 1.2. As you can see, it is located at 90 north latitude. Where does a compass Q: The north end of a compass needle points toward Earths north magnetic pole. The like poles of two magnets repel each other, and the opposite poles attract. So why doesnt the north end of a compass needle point to Earths south magnetic pole instead? A: The answer may surprise you. The compass needle actually does point to the south pole of magnet Earth. However, it is called the north magnetic pole because it is close to the north geographic pole. This naming convention was adopted a long time ago to avoid confusion. 	the like poles of two magnets always attract each other	false
Like all magnets, Earth has a magnetic field. Earths magnetic field is called the magnetosphere. You can see a model of the magnetosphere in the Figure 1.3. It is a huge region that extends outward from Earth in all directions. Earth exerts magnetic force over the entire field, but the force is strongest at the poles, where lines of force converge. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	earths magnetic field is a huge region	true
A dolly is a machine because it changes a force to make work easier. What is work? In physics, work is defined as the use of force to move an object over a distance. It is represented by the equation: Work = Force x Distance All machines make work easier, but they dont increase the amount of work that is done. You can never get more work out of a machine than you put into it. In fact, a machine always does less work on an object than the user does on the machine. Thats because a machine must use some of the work put into it to overcome friction. Friction is the force that opposes motion between any surfaces that are touching. All machines involve motion, so they all have friction. How much work is needed to overcome friction in a machine depends on the machines efficiency. 	all machines make work easier	true
A dolly is a machine because it changes a force to make work easier. What is work? In physics, work is defined as the use of force to move an object over a distance. It is represented by the equation: Work = Force x Distance All machines make work easier, but they dont increase the amount of work that is done. You can never get more work out of a machine than you put into it. In fact, a machine always does less work on an object than the user does on the machine. Thats because a machine must use some of the work put into it to overcome friction. Friction is the force that opposes motion between any surfaces that are touching. All machines involve motion, so they all have friction. How much work is needed to overcome friction in a machine depends on the machines efficiency. 	you can get more work out of a machine than you put into it	false
In the late 1600s, Isaac Newton introduced his law of gravity, which identifies gravity as a force of attraction between all objects with mass in the universe. The law also states that the strength of gravity between two objects depends on their mass and distance apart. Newtons law of gravity was accepted for more than two centuries. It can predict the motion of most objects and was even used by NASA to land astronauts on the moon. Its still used for most practical purposes. However, Newtons law doesnt explain why gravity occurs. It only describes how gravity seems to affect objects. There are also some cases in which Newtons law doesnt even describe what happens. Q: Newton expressed his ideas about gravity as a law. A law in science is a description of what always occurs in nature. For example, according to Newtons law, objects on Earth always fall down, not up. What is needed to explain gravity? A: A theory is needed to explain gravity. In science, a theory is a broad explanation that is supported by a great deal of evidence. 	newtons law of gravity was accepted for more than 200 years	true
In the early 1900s, Albert Einstein came up with a theory of gravity that actually explains gravity rather than simply describing its effects. Einstein showed mathematically that gravity is not really a force that of attraction between all objects with mass, as Newton thought. Instead, Einstein showed that gravity is a result of the warping, or curving, of space and time, which made up the same space-time fabric. These ideas about space-time and gravity became known as Einsteins theory of general relativity. 	newtons law of gravity explains why gravity occurs	false
In the early 1900s, Albert Einstein came up with a theory of gravity that actually explains gravity rather than simply describing its effects. Einstein showed mathematically that gravity is not really a force that of attraction between all objects with mass, as Newton thought. Instead, Einstein showed that gravity is a result of the warping, or curving, of space and time, which made up the same space-time fabric. These ideas about space-time and gravity became known as Einsteins theory of general relativity. 	einstein explained gravity with his theory of universal gravitation	false
Something that is elastic can return to its original shape after being stretched or compressed. This property is called elasticity. As you stretch or compress an elastic material like a bungee cord, it resists the change in shape. It exerts a counter force in the opposite direction. This force is called elastic force. The farther the material is stretched or compressed, the greater the elastic force becomes. As soon as the stretching or compressing force is released, elastic force causes the material to spring back to its original shape. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Q: What force stretches the bungee cord after the jumper jumps? When does the bungee cord snap back to its original shape? A: After the bungee jumper jumps, he accelerates toward the ground due to gravity. His weight stretches the bungee cord. As the bungee cord stretches, it exerts elastic force upward against the jumper, which slows his descent and brings him to a momentary stop. Then the bungee cord springs back to its original shape, and the jumper bounces upward. 	the less an elastic material is stretched or compressed the greater the force it exerts	false
Something that is elastic can return to its original shape after being stretched or compressed. This property is called elasticity. As you stretch or compress an elastic material like a bungee cord, it resists the change in shape. It exerts a counter force in the opposite direction. This force is called elastic force. The farther the material is stretched or compressed, the greater the elastic force becomes. As soon as the stretching or compressing force is released, elastic force causes the material to spring back to its original shape. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Q: What force stretches the bungee cord after the jumper jumps? When does the bungee cord snap back to its original shape? A: After the bungee jumper jumps, he accelerates toward the ground due to gravity. His weight stretches the bungee cord. As the bungee cord stretches, it exerts elastic force upward against the jumper, which slows his descent and brings him to a momentary stop. Then the bungee cord springs back to its original shape, and the jumper bounces upward. 	elastic force causes an elastic material to spring back to its original shape after being stretched or compressed	true
Something that is elastic can return to its original shape after being stretched or compressed. This property is called elasticity. As you stretch or compress an elastic material like a bungee cord, it resists the change in shape. It exerts a counter force in the opposite direction. This force is called elastic force. The farther the material is stretched or compressed, the greater the elastic force becomes. As soon as the stretching or compressing force is released, elastic force causes the material to spring back to its original shape. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Q: What force stretches the bungee cord after the jumper jumps? When does the bungee cord snap back to its original shape? A: After the bungee jumper jumps, he accelerates toward the ground due to gravity. His weight stretches the bungee cord. As the bungee cord stretches, it exerts elastic force upward against the jumper, which slows his descent and brings him to a momentary stop. Then the bungee cord springs back to its original shape, and the jumper bounces upward. 	an elastic material offers no resistance to forces that change its shape	false
Electromagnetic radiation is energy that travels in waves across space as well as through matter. Most of the electromagnetic radiation on Earth comes from the sun. Like other waves, electromagnetic waves are characterized by certain wavelengths and wave frequencies. Wavelength is the distance between two corresponding points on adjacent waves. Wave frequency is the number of waves that pass a fixed point in a given amount of time. Electromagnetic waves with shorter wavelengths have higher frequencies and more energy. 	most of the electromagnetic radiation on earth comes from the sun	true
Visible light and infrared light are just a small part of the full range of electromagnetic radiation, which is called the electromagnetic spectrum. You can see the waves of the electromagnetic spectrum in the Figure 1.1. At the top of the diagram, the wavelengths of the waves are given. Also included are objects that are about the same size as the corresponding wavelengths. The frequencies and energy levels of the waves are shown at the bottom of the diagram. Some sources of the waves are also given. On the left side of the electromagnetic spectrum diagram are radio waves and microwaves. Radio waves have the longest wavelengths and lowest frequencies of all electromagnetic waves. They also have the least amount of energy. On the right side of the diagram are X rays and gamma rays. They have the shortest wavelengths and highest frequencies of all electromagnetic waves. They also have the most energy. Between these two extremes are waves that are commonly called light. Light includes infrared light, visible light, and ultraviolet light. The wavelengths, frequencies, and energy levels of light fall in between those of radio waves on the left and X rays and gamma rays on the right. Q: Which type of light has the longest wavelengths? A: Infrared light has the longest wavelengths. Q: What sources of infrared light are shown in the diagram? A: The sources in the diagram are people and light bulbs, but all living things and most other objects give off infrared light. 	the only electromagnetic waves in sunlight are ultraviolet infrared and visible light	false
Visible light and infrared light are just a small part of the full range of electromagnetic radiation, which is called the electromagnetic spectrum. You can see the waves of the electromagnetic spectrum in the Figure 1.1. At the top of the diagram, the wavelengths of the waves are given. Also included are objects that are about the same size as the corresponding wavelengths. The frequencies and energy levels of the waves are shown at the bottom of the diagram. Some sources of the waves are also given. On the left side of the electromagnetic spectrum diagram are radio waves and microwaves. Radio waves have the longest wavelengths and lowest frequencies of all electromagnetic waves. They also have the least amount of energy. On the right side of the diagram are X rays and gamma rays. They have the shortest wavelengths and highest frequencies of all electromagnetic waves. They also have the most energy. Between these two extremes are waves that are commonly called light. Light includes infrared light, visible light, and ultraviolet light. The wavelengths, frequencies, and energy levels of light fall in between those of radio waves on the left and X rays and gamma rays on the right. Q: Which type of light has the longest wavelengths? A: Infrared light has the longest wavelengths. Q: What sources of infrared light are shown in the diagram? A: The sources in the diagram are people and light bulbs, but all living things and most other objects give off infrared light. 	ultraviolet light has more energy than visible light	true
Electromagnetic waves are waves that consist of vibrating electric and magnetic fields. Like other waves, electro- magnetic waves transfer energy from one place to another. The transfer of energy by electromagnetic waves is called electromagnetic radiation. Electromagnetic waves can transfer energy through matter or across empty space. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Q: How do microwaves transfer energy inside a microwave oven? A: They transfer energy through the air inside the oven to the food. 	electromagnetic waves need a medium in order to transfer energy	false
When electromagnetic waves strike matter, they may interact with it in the same ways that mechanical waves interact with matter. Electromagnetic waves may: reflect, or bounce back from a surface; refract, or bend when entering a new medium; diffract, or spread out around obstacles. Electromagnetic waves may also be absorbed by matter and converted to other forms of energy. Microwaves are a familiar example. When microwaves strike food in a microwave oven, they are absorbed and converted to thermal energy, which heats the food. 	electromagnetic waves may be converted to other forms of energy	true
Schrdingers work on orbitals is the basis of the modern model of the atom, which scientists call the quantum mechanical model. The modern model is also commonly called the electron cloud model. Thats because each orbital around the nucleus of the atom resembles a fuzzy cloud around the nucleus, like the ones shown in the Figure 1.3 for a helium atom. The densest area of the cloud is where the electrons have the greatest chances of being. Q: In the model pictured in the Figure 1.3, where are the two helium electrons most likely to be? A: The two electrons are most likely to be inside the sphere closest to the nucleus where the cloud is darkest. 	the atomic nucleus is always at the center of an orbital	true
Up until about 1920, scientists accepted Niels Bohrs model of the atom. In this model, negative electrons circle the positive nucleus at fixed distances from the nucleus, called energy levels. You can see the model in Figure 1.1 for an atom of the element nitrogen. Bohrs model is useful for understanding properties of elements and their chemical interactions. However, it doesnt explain certain behaviors of electrons, except for those in the simplest atom, the hydrogen atom. 	bohrs atomic model explains all of the behaviors of electrons in atoms of all elements	false
Schrdingers work on orbitals is the basis of the modern model of the atom, which scientists call the quantum mechanical model. The modern model is also commonly called the electron cloud model. Thats because each orbital around the nucleus of the atom resembles a fuzzy cloud around the nucleus, like the ones shown in the Figure 1.3 for a helium atom. The densest area of the cloud is where the electrons have the greatest chances of being. Q: In the model pictured in the Figure 1.3, where are the two helium electrons most likely to be? A: The two electrons are most likely to be inside the sphere closest to the nucleus where the cloud is darkest. 	the electron cloud model of the atom is no longer accepted by most scientists	false
Electrons are one of three main types of particles that make up atoms. The other two types are protons and neutrons. Unlike protons and neutrons, which consist of smaller, simpler particles, electrons are fundamental particles that do not consist of smaller particles. They are a type of fundamental particles called leptons. All leptons have an electric charge of -1 or 0. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	like protons and neutrons electrons consist of smaller particles	false
Electrons are extremely small. The mass of an electron is only about 1/2000 the mass of a proton or neutron, so electrons contribute virtually nothing to the total mass of an atom. Electrons have an electric charge of -1, which is equal but opposite to the charge of proton, which is +1. All atoms have the same number of electrons as protons, so the positive and negative charges cancel out, making atoms electrically neutral. 	an electron has about the same mass as a proton	false
Electrons are one of three main types of particles that make up atoms. The other two types are protons and neutrons. Unlike protons and neutrons, which consist of smaller, simpler particles, electrons are fundamental particles that do not consist of smaller particles. They are a type of fundamental particles called leptons. All leptons have an electric charge of -1 or 0. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	atoms always have the same number of electrons as protons	true
For thousands of years, people have wondered about the substances that make up matter. About 2500 years ago, the Greek philosopher Aristotle argued that all matter is made up of just four elements, which he identified as earth, air, water, and fire. He thought that different substances vary in their properties because they contain different proportions of these four elements. Aristotle had the right idea, but he was wrong about which substances are elements. Nonetheless, his four elements were accepted until just a few hundred years ago. Then scientists started discovering many of the elements with which we are familiar today. Eventually they discovered dozens of different elements. 	no two elements are exactly alike	true
Each element has a unique set of properties that is different from the set of properties of any other element. For example, the element iron is a solid that is attracted by a magnet and can be made into a magnet, like the compass needle shown in the Figure 1.1. The element neon, on the other hand, is a gas that gives off a red glow when electricity flows through it. The lighted sign in the Figure 1.2 contains neon. The needle of this compass is made of the element iron. Q: Do you know properties of any other elements? For example, what do you know about helium? A: Helium is a gas that has a lower density than air. Thats why helium balloons have to be weighted down so they wont float away. Q: Living things, like all matter, are made of elements. Do you know which element is most common in living things? A: Carbon is the most common element in living things. It has the unique property of being able to combine with many other elements as well as with itself. This allows carbon to form a huge number of different substances. 	carbon is the most common element in living things	true
For thousands of years, people have wondered about the substances that make up matter. About 2500 years ago, the Greek philosopher Aristotle argued that all matter is made up of just four elements, which he identified as earth, air, water, and fire. He thought that different substances vary in their properties because they contain different proportions of these four elements. Aristotle had the right idea, but he was wrong about which substances are elements. Nonetheless, his four elements were accepted until just a few hundred years ago. Then scientists started discovering many of the elements with which we are familiar today. Eventually they discovered dozens of different elements. 	aristotle correctly identified four of the elements	false
All chemical reactions involve energy. Energy is used to break bonds in reactants, and energy is released when new bonds form in products. In some chemical reactions, called exothermic reactions, more energy is released when new bonds form in the products than is needed to break bonds in the reactants. The opposite is true of endothermic reactions. In an endothermic reaction, it takes more energy to break bonds in the reactants than is released when new bonds form in the products. 	only endothermic chemical reactions involve energy	false
All chemical reactions involve energy. Energy is used to break bonds in reactants, and energy is released when new bonds form in products. In some chemical reactions, called exothermic reactions, more energy is released when new bonds form in the products than is needed to break bonds in the reactants. The opposite is true of endothermic reactions. In an endothermic reaction, it takes more energy to break bonds in the reactants than is released when new bonds form in the products. 	in an endothermic reaction it takes less energy to break bonds in the reactants than is released when new bonds form in the products	false
All chemical reactions involve energy. Energy is used to break bonds in reactants, and energy is released when new bonds form in products. In some chemical reactions, called exothermic reactions, more energy is released when new bonds form in the products than is needed to break bonds in the reactants. The opposite is true of endothermic reactions. In an endothermic reaction, it takes more energy to break bonds in the reactants than is released when new bonds form in the products. 	a constant input of energy is needed to keep an endothermic reaction going	true
Energy is defined in science as the ability to move matter or change matter in some other way. Energy can also be defined as the ability to do work, which means using force to move an object over a distance. When work is done, energy is transferred from one object to another. For example, when the boy in the Figure 1.1 uses force to swing the racket, he transfers some of his energy to the racket. Q: It takes energy to play tennis. Where does this boy get his energy? A: He gets energy from the food he eats. 	when work is done energy is transferred from one object to another	true
Because energy is the ability to do work, it is expressed in the same unit that is used for work. The SI unit for both work and energy is the joule (J), or Newton  meter (N  m). One joule is the amount of energy needed to apply a force of 1 Newton over a distance of 1 meter. For example, suppose the boy in the Figure 1.1 applies 20 Newtons of force to his tennis racket over a distance of 1 meter. The energy needed to do this work is 20 N m, or 20 J. 	the si unit for energy is the newton	false
If you think about different sources of energysuch as batteries and the sunyou probably realize that energy can take different forms. For example, when the boy swings his tennis racket, the energy of the moving racket is an example of mechanical energy. To move his racket, the boy needs energy stored in food, which is an example of chemical energy. Other forms of energy include electrical, thermal, light, and sound energy. The different forms of energy can also be classified as either kinetic energy or potential energy. Kinetic energy is the energy of moving matter. Potential energy is energy that is stored in matter. Q: Is the chemical energy in food kinetic energy or potential energy? A: The chemical energy in food is potential energy. It is stored in the chemical bonds that make up food molecules. The stored energy is released when we digest food. Then we can use it for many purposes, such as moving (mechanical energy) or staying warm (thermal energy). Q: What is an example of kinetic energy? A: Anything that is moving has kinetic energy. An example is a moving tennis racket. 	anything that is moving has kinetic energy	true
Gravity is a force, but not like other forces you may know. Gravity is a bit special. You know that a force is a push or pull. If you push a ball, it starts to roll. If you lift a book, it moves upward. Now, imagine you drop a ball. It falls to the ground. Can you see the force pulling it down? That is what makes gravity really cool. It is invisible. Invisible means you cannot see it. But wait, it has even more surprises. Gravity holds planets in place around the Sun. Gravity keeps the Moon from flying off into space. Gravity exerts a force on objects that are not even touching. In fact, gravity can act over very large distances. However, the force does get weaker the farther apart the objects are. 	energy conversion means saving energy	false
Gravity is a force, but not like other forces you may know. Gravity is a bit special. You know that a force is a push or pull. If you push a ball, it starts to roll. If you lift a book, it moves upward. Now, imagine you drop a ball. It falls to the ground. Can you see the force pulling it down? That is what makes gravity really cool. It is invisible. Invisible means you cannot see it. But wait, it has even more surprises. Gravity holds planets in place around the Sun. Gravity keeps the Moon from flying off into space. Gravity exerts a force on objects that are not even touching. In fact, gravity can act over very large distances. However, the force does get weaker the farther apart the objects are. 	any form of energy can change into any other form of energy	true
Gravity is a force, but not like other forces you may know. Gravity is a bit special. You know that a force is a push or pull. If you push a ball, it starts to roll. If you lift a book, it moves upward. Now, imagine you drop a ball. It falls to the ground. Can you see the force pulling it down? That is what makes gravity really cool. It is invisible. Invisible means you cannot see it. But wait, it has even more surprises. Gravity holds planets in place around the Sun. Gravity keeps the Moon from flying off into space. Gravity exerts a force on objects that are not even touching. In fact, gravity can act over very large distances. However, the force does get weaker the farther apart the objects are. 	one form of energy can change into two or more other forms of energy	true
Energy levels (also called electron shells) are fixed distances from the nucleus of an atom where electrons may be found. Electrons are tiny, negatively charged particles in an atom that move around the positive nucleus at the center. Energy levels are a little like the steps of a staircase. You can stand on one step or another but not in between the steps. The same goes for electrons. They can occupy one energy level or another but not the space between energy levels. The model in the Figure 1.1 shows the first four energy levels of an atom. Electrons in energy level I (also called energy level K) have the least amount of energy. As you go farther from the nucleus, electrons at higher levels have more energy, and their energy increases by a fixed, discrete amount. Electrons can jump from a lower to the next higher energy level if they absorb this amount of energy. Conversely, if electrons jump from a higher to a lower energy level, they give off energy, often in the form of light. This explains the fireworks pictured above. When the fireworks explode, electrons gain energy and jump to higher energy levels. When they jump back to their original energy levels, they release the energy as light. Different atoms have different arrangements of electrons, so they give off light of different colors. Q: In the atomic model Figure 1.1, where would you find electrons that have the most energy? A: Electrons with the most energy would be found in energy level IV. 	electrons can occupy the spaces between energy levels	false
Energy levels (also called electron shells) are fixed distances from the nucleus of an atom where electrons may be found. Electrons are tiny, negatively charged particles in an atom that move around the positive nucleus at the center. Energy levels are a little like the steps of a staircase. You can stand on one step or another but not in between the steps. The same goes for electrons. They can occupy one energy level or another but not the space between energy levels. The model in the Figure 1.1 shows the first four energy levels of an atom. Electrons in energy level I (also called energy level K) have the least amount of energy. As you go farther from the nucleus, electrons at higher levels have more energy, and their energy increases by a fixed, discrete amount. Electrons can jump from a lower to the next higher energy level if they absorb this amount of energy. Conversely, if electrons jump from a higher to a lower energy level, they give off energy, often in the form of light. This explains the fireworks pictured above. When the fireworks explode, electrons gain energy and jump to higher energy levels. When they jump back to their original energy levels, they release the energy as light. Different atoms have different arrangements of electrons, so they give off light of different colors. Q: In the atomic model Figure 1.1, where would you find electrons that have the most energy? A: Electrons with the most energy would be found in energy level IV. 	electrons in the first energy level have the least amount of energy	true
Electrons in the outermost energy level of an atom have a special significance. These electrons are called valence electrons, and they determine many of the properties of an atom. An atom is most stable if its outermost energy level contains as many electrons as it can hold. For example, helium has two electrons, both in the first energy level. This energy level can hold only two electrons, so heliums only energy level is full. This makes helium a very stable element. In other words, its atoms are unlikely to react with other atoms. Consider the elements fluorine and lithium, modeled in the Figure 1.3. Fluorine has seven of eight possible electrons in its outermost energy level, which is energy level II. It would be more stable if it had one more electron because this would fill its outermost energy level. Lithium, on the other hand, has just one of eight possible electrons in its outermost energy level (also energy level II). It would be more stable if it had one less electron because it would have a full outer energy level (now energy level I). Both fluorine and lithium are highly reactive elements because of their number of valence electrons. Fluorine will readily gain one electron and lithium will just as readily give up one electron to become more stable. In fact, lithium and fluorine will react together as shown in the Figure 1.4. When the two elements react, lithium transfers its one extra electron to fluorine. Q: A neon atom has ten electrons. How many electrons does it have in its outermost energy level? How stable do you think a neon atom is? A: A neon atom has two electrons in energy level I and its remaining eight electrons in energy level II, which can 	valence electrons determine how reactive an element is	true
More than 1000 different enzymes are necessary for human life. Many enzymes are needed for the digestion of food. Two examples are amylase and pepsin. Both are described in the Figure 1.2. 	enzymes work by providing activation energy	false
Chemical reactions constantly occur inside the cells of living things. However, under the conditions inside cells, most biochemical reactions would occur too slowly to maintain life. Thats where enzymes come in. Enzymes are catalysts in living things. Like other catalysts, they speed up chemical reactions. Enzymes are proteins that are synthesized in the cells that need them, based on instructions encoded in the cells DNA. 	enzymes are used up in the reactions they catalyze	false
More than 1000 different enzymes are necessary for human life. Many enzymes are needed for the digestion of food. Two examples are amylase and pepsin. Both are described in the Figure 1.2. 	about 100 different enzymes are needed for human life	false
All chemical reactions involve energy. Energy is used to break bonds in reactants, and energy is released when new bonds form in products. In some chemical reactions, called endothermic reactions, less energy is released when new bonds form in the products than is needed to break bonds in the reactants. The opposite is true of exothermic reactions. In an exothermic reaction, it takes less energy to break bonds in the reactants than is released when new bonds form in the products. 	in an exothermic reaction the reactants have more stored chemical energy than the products	true
All chemical reactions involve energy. Energy is used to break bonds in reactants, and energy is released when new bonds form in products. In some chemical reactions, called endothermic reactions, less energy is released when new bonds form in the products than is needed to break bonds in the reactants. The opposite is true of exothermic reactions. In an exothermic reaction, it takes less energy to break bonds in the reactants than is released when new bonds form in the products. 	in an exothermic reaction it takes more energy to break bonds in the reactants than is released when new bonds form in the products	false
All combustion reactions are exothermic reactions. During a combustion reaction, a substance burns as it combines with oxygen. When substances burn, they usually give off energy as heat and light. Look at the big bonfire in the Figure 1.2. The combustion of wood is an exothermic reaction that releases a lot of energy as heat and light. You can see the light energy the fire is giving off. If you were standing near the fire, you would also feel its heat. 	all combustion reactions are exothermic reactions	true
A combustion engine is a complex machine that burns fuel to produce thermal energy and then uses the thermal energy to do work. There are two types of combustion engines: external and internal. A steam engine is an external combustion engine. 	a steam engine is an external combustion engine	true
A combustion engine is a complex machine that burns fuel to produce thermal energy and then uses the thermal energy to do work. There are two types of combustion engines: external and internal. A steam engine is an external combustion engine. 	an external combustion engine burns fuel to heat air	false
A combustion engine is a complex machine that burns fuel to produce thermal energy and then uses the thermal energy to do work. There are two types of combustion engines: external and internal. A steam engine is an external combustion engine. 	external combustion engines are no longer in use today	false
Some materials are natural permanent magnets. The most magnetic material in nature is the mineral magnetite, also called lodestone (see Figure 1.4). The magnetic domains of magnetite naturally align with Earths axis. The picture on the left shows a chunk of magnetite attracting small bits of iron. The magnetite spoon compass shown on the right dates back about 2000 years and comes from China. The handle of the spoon always points north. Clearly, the magnetic properties of magnetite have been recognized for thousands of years. 	all materials respond to magnetic force	false
Magnetism is the ability of a material to be attracted by a magnet and to act as a magnet. Magnetism is due to the movement of electrons within atoms of matter. When electrons spin around the nucleus of an atom, it causes the atom to become a tiny magnet, with north and south poles and a magnetic field. In most materials, the north and south poles of atoms point in all different directions, so overall the material is not magnetic. Examples of nonmagnetic materials include wood, glass, plastic, paper, copper, and aluminum. These materials are not attracted to magnets and cannot become magnets. In other materials, there are regions where the north and south poles of atoms are all lined up in the same direction. These regions are called magnetic domains. Generally, the magnetic domains point in different directions, so the material is still not magnetic. However, the material can be magnetized (made into a magnet) by placing it in a magnetic field. When this happens, all the magnetic domains line up, and the material becomes a magnet. You can see this in the Figure 1.1. Materials that can be magnitized are called ferromagnetic materials. They include iron, cobalt, and nickel. 	magnetism is due to the movement of electrons within atoms	true
Materials that have been magnetized may become temporary or permanent magnets. If you bring a bar magnet close to pile of paper clips, the paper clips will become temporarily magnetized, as all their magnetic domains line up. As a result, the paper clips will stick to the magnet and also to each other (see the Figure 1.2). However, if you remove the paper clips from the bar magnets magnetic field, their magnetic domains will no longer align. As a result, the paper clips will no longer be magnetized or stick together. If you stroke an iron nail with a bar magnet, the nail will become a permanent (or at least long-lasting) magnet. You can see how its done in the Figure 1.3. The nails magnetic domains will remain aligned even after you remove the nail from the magnetic field of the bar magnet. Q: Even permanent magnets can be demagnetized if they are dropped or heated to high temperatures. Can you explain why? 	if you stroke an iron nail with a bar magnet the nail will become a temporary magnet	false
Force is defined as a push or pull acting on an object. There are several fundamental forces in the universe, including the force of gravity, electromagnetic force, and weak and strong nuclear forces. When it comes to the motion of everyday objects, however, the forces of interest include mainly gravity, friction, and applied force. Applied force is force that a person or thing applies to an object. Q: What forces act on Carsons scooter? A: Gravity, friction, and applied forces all act on Carsons scooter. Gravity keeps pulling both Carson and the scooter toward the ground. Friction between the wheels of the scooter and the ground prevent the scooter from sliding but also slow it down. In addition, Carson applies forces to his scooter to control its speed and direction. 	only some changes in speed or direction are caused by forces	false
Forces cause all motions. Everytime the motion of an object changes, its because a force has been applied to it. Force can cause a stationary object to start moving or a moving object to change its speed or direction or both. A change in the speed or direction of an object is called acceleration. Look at Carsons brother Colton in the Figure starts the scooter moving in the opposite direction. The harder he pushes against the ground, the faster the scooter will go. How much an object accelerates when a force is applied to it depends not only on the strength of the force but also on the objects mass. For example, a heavier scooter would be harder to accelerate. Colton would have to push with more force to start it moving and move it faster. Q: What units do you think are used to measure force? A: The SI unit for force is the Newton (N). A Newton is the force needed to cause a mass of 1 kilogram to accelerate at 1 m/s2 , so a Newton equals 1 kg  m/s2 . The Newton was named for the scientist Sir Isaac Newton, who is famous for his laws of motion and gravity. 	the force required to change an objects motion depends on the objects mass	true
Force is a vector, or a measure that has both size and direction. For example, Colton pushes on the ground in the opposite direction that the scooter moves, so thats the direction of the force he is applies. He can give the scooter a strong push or a weak push. Thats the size of the force. Like other vectors, a force can be represented with an arrow. You can see some examples in the Figure 1.2. The length of each arrow represents the strength of the force, and the way the arrow points represents the direction of the force. Q: How could you use arrows to represent the forces that start Coltons scooter moving? A: Colton pushes against the ground behind him (to the right in the Figure 1.1). The ground pushes back with equal force to the left, causing the scooter to move in that direction. Force arrows A and B in example 2 in the Figure 1.1) could represent these forces. 	force is a vector	true
Energy, or the ability to cause changes in matter, can exist in many different forms. Energy can also change from one form to another. The photo above of the guitar player represents six forms of energy: mechanical, chemical, electrical, light, thermal, and sound energy. Another form of energy is nuclear energy. Q: Can you find the six different forms of energy in the photo of the guitar player (See opening image)? A: The guitarist uses mechanical energy to pluck the strings of the guitar. He gets the energy he needs to perform from chemical energy in food he ate earlier in the day. The stage lights use electrical energy, which they change to light energy and thermal energy (commonly called heat). The guitar produces sound energy when the guitarist plucks the strings. 	energy can change from one form to another	true
Energy, or the ability to cause changes in matter, can exist in many different forms. Energy can also change from one form to another. The photo above of the guitar player represents six forms of energy: mechanical, chemical, electrical, light, thermal, and sound energy. Another form of energy is nuclear energy. Q: Can you find the six different forms of energy in the photo of the guitar player (See opening image)? A: The guitarist uses mechanical energy to pluck the strings of the guitar. He gets the energy he needs to perform from chemical energy in food he ate earlier in the day. The stage lights use electrical energy, which they change to light energy and thermal energy (commonly called heat). The guitar produces sound energy when the guitarist plucks the strings. 	the energy of moving electrons is called chemical energy	false
How high or low a sound seems to a listener is its pitch. Pitch, in turn, depends on the frequency of sound waves. Wave frequency is the number of waves that pass a fixed point in a given amount of time. High-pitched sounds, like the sounds of the piccolo in the Figure 1.1, have high-frequency waves. Low-pitched sounds, like the sounds of the tuba Figure 1.1, have low-frequency waves. 	the pitch of sound depends on the amplitude of sound waves	false
How high or low a sound seems to a listener is its pitch. Pitch, in turn, depends on the frequency of sound waves. Wave frequency is the number of waves that pass a fixed point in a given amount of time. High-pitched sounds, like the sounds of the piccolo in the Figure 1.1, have high-frequency waves. Low-pitched sounds, like the sounds of the tuba Figure 1.1, have low-frequency waves. 	dogs can hear sounds that are too high in pitch for humans to hear	true
Friction occurs because no surface is perfectly smooth. Even surfaces that look smooth to the unaided eye make look rough or bumpy when viewed under a microscope. Look at the metal surfaces in the Figure 1.3. The aluminum foil These photos show two ways that friction is useful These photos show two ways that friction can cause problems is so smooth that its shiny. However, when highly magnified, the surface of metal appears to be very bumpy. All those mountains and valleys catch and grab the mountains and valleys of any other surface that contacts the metal. This creates friction. 	only rough surfaces have friction between them	false
Rougher surfaces have more friction between them than smoother surfaces. Thats why we put sand on icy sidewalks and roads. You cant slide as far across ice with shoes as you can on the blades of skates (see Figure 1.4). The rougher surface of the soles of the shoes causes more friction and slows you down. Q: Heavier objects also have more friction. Can you explain why? A: Heavier objects press together with greater force, and this causes greater friction between them. Did you ever try to furniture across the floor? Its harder to overcome friction between a heavier piece of furniture and the floor than between lighter pieces and the floor. 	heavier objects have less friction with the floor than lighter objects	false
You know that friction produces heat. Thats why rubbing your hands together makes them warmer. But do you know why? Friction causes the molecules on rubbing surfaces to move faster, so they have more energy. This gives them a higher temperature, and they feel warmer. Heat from friction can be useful. It not only warms your hands. It also lets you light a match as shown in the Figure 1.5. On the other hand, heat from friction between moving parts inside a car engine can be a big problem. It can cause the car to overheat. Q: How is friction reduced between the moving parts inside a car engine? A: To reduce friction, oil is added to the engine. The oil coats the surfaces of the moving parts and makes them slippery. They slide over each other more easily, so there is less friction. 	friction produces heat because it causes molecules to move faster and have more energy	true
Based on their knowledge of subatomic particles, scientists have developed a theory called the standard model to explain all the matter in the universe and how it is held together. The model includes only the fundamental particles in the Table 1.2. No other particles are needed to explain all kinds of matter. According to the model, all known matter consists of quarks and leptons that interact by exchanging bosons, which transmit fundamental forces. The standard model is a good theory because all of its predictions have been verified by experimental data. However, the model doesnt explain everything, including the force of gravity and why matter has mass. Scientists continue to search for evidence that will allow them to explain these aspects of force and matter as well. 	scientists think that leptons and quarks are held together by neutrinos	false
Today, scientists think that electrons truly are fundamental particles that cannot be broken down into smaller, simpler particles. They are a type of fundamental particles called leptons. Protons and neutrons, on the other hand, are no longer thought to be fundamental particles. Instead, they are now thought to consist of smaller, simpler particles of matter called quarks. Scientists theorize that leptons and quarks are held together by yet another type of fundamental particles called bosons. All three types of fundamental particlesleptons, quarks, and bosonsare described below. The following Figure 1.1 shows the variety of particles of each type. There are six types of quarks. In ordinary matter, virtually all quarks are of the types called up and down quarks. All quarks have mass, and they have an electric charge of either +2/3 or -1/3. For example, up quarks have a charge of +2/3, and down quarks have a charge of -1/3. Quarks also have a different type of charge, called color charge, although it has nothing to do with the colors that we see. Quarks are never found alone but instead always occur in groups of two or three quarks. There are also six types of leptons, including electrons. Leptons have an electric charge of either -1 or 0. Electrons, for example, have a charge of -1. Leptons have mass, although the mass of electrons is extremely small. There are four known types of bosons, which are force-carrying particles. Each of these bosons carries a different fundamental force between interacting particles. In addition, there is a particle which may exist, called the "Higgs Boson", which gives objects the masses they have. Some types of bosons have mass; others are massless. Bosons have an electric charge of +1, -1, or 0. Q: Protons consist of three quarks: two up quarks and one down quark. Neutrons also consist of three quarks: two down quarks and one up quark. Based on this information, what is the total electric charge of a proton? Of a neutron? A: These combinations of quarks give protons a total electric charge of +1 (2/3 + 2/3 - 1/3 = 1) and neutrons a total electric charge of 0 (2/3 - 1/3 - 1/3 = 0). 	in ordinary matter virtually all quarks are strange quarks and charm quarks	false
Gamma rays are produced when radioactive elements decay. Radioactive elements are elements with unstable nuclei. To become more stable, the nuclei undergo radioactive decay. In this process, the nuclei give off energy and may also emit charged particles of matter. Types of radioactive decay include alpha, beta, and gamma decay. In alpha and beta decay, both particles and energy are emitted. In gamma decay, only energy, in the form of gamma rays, is emitted. Alpha and beta decay occur when a nucleus has too many protons or an unstable ratio of protons to neutrons. When the nucleus emits a particle, it gains or loses one or two protons, so the atom becomes a different element. Gamma decay, in contrast, occurs when a nucleus is in an excited state and has too much energy to be stable. This often happens after alpha or beta decay has occurred. Because only energy is emitted during gamma decay, the number of protons remains the same. Therefore, an atom does not become a different element during this type of decay. Q: The Figure 1.1 shows how helium-3 (He-3) decays by emitting a gamma particle. How can you tell that the atom is still the same element after gamma decay occurs? A: The nucleus of the atom has two protons (red) before the reaction occurs. After the nucleus emits the gamma particle, it still has two protons, so the atom is still the same element. 	radioactive nuclei undergo decay because they are unstable	true
Gamma rays are the most dangerous type of radiation. They can travel farther and penetrate materials more deeply than can the charged particles emitted during alpha and beta decay. Gamma rays can be stopped only by several centimeters of lead or several meters of concrete. Its no surprise that they can penetrate and damage cells deep inside the body. 	in gamma decay both particles of matter and energy are emitted	false
Gamma rays are produced when radioactive elements decay. Radioactive elements are elements with unstable nuclei. To become more stable, the nuclei undergo radioactive decay. In this process, the nuclei give off energy and may also emit charged particles of matter. Types of radioactive decay include alpha, beta, and gamma decay. In alpha and beta decay, both particles and energy are emitted. In gamma decay, only energy, in the form of gamma rays, is emitted. Alpha and beta decay occur when a nucleus has too many protons or an unstable ratio of protons to neutrons. When the nucleus emits a particle, it gains or loses one or two protons, so the atom becomes a different element. Gamma decay, in contrast, occurs when a nucleus is in an excited state and has too much energy to be stable. This often happens after alpha or beta decay has occurred. Because only energy is emitted during gamma decay, the number of protons remains the same. Therefore, an atom does not become a different element during this type of decay. Q: The Figure 1.1 shows how helium-3 (He-3) decays by emitting a gamma particle. How can you tell that the atom is still the same element after gamma decay occurs? A: The nucleus of the atom has two protons (red) before the reaction occurs. After the nucleus emits the gamma particle, it still has two protons, so the atom is still the same element. 	gamma decay results in a nucleus with a different number of protons	false
Electromagnetic waves transfer energy across space as well as through matter. They vary in their wavelengths and frequencies, and higher-frequency waves have more energy. The full range of wavelengths of electromagnetic waves, shown in the Figure 1.1, is called the electromagnetic spectrum. 	higherenergy electromagnetic waves have lower frequencies	false
As you can see in the Figure 1.1, gamma rays have the shortest wavelengths and highest frequencies of all electromagnetic waves. Their wavelengths are shorter than the diameter of atomic nuclei, and their frequencies are greater than 1019 hertz (Hz). Thats 10 quadrillion waves per second! Because of their high frequencies, gamma rays are also the most energetic of all electromagnetic waves. 	gamma rays have wavelengths shorter than the nucleus of an atom	true
Gamma rays are given off by radioactive atoms and nuclear explosions. They are also given off by the sun and other stars, as well as by collapsing stars in gamma ray bursts. Fortunately, gamma rays from space are absorbed by Earths atmosphere before they can reach the surface. Q: Predict how gamma rays might affect living things on Earth if they werent absorbed by the atmosphere. A: Gamma rays would destroy most living things on Earth because they have so much energy. 	gamma rays from space are absorbed by earths atmosphere	true
Gravity has traditionally been defined as a force of attraction between things that have mass. According to this conception of gravity, anything that has mass, no matter how small, exerts gravity on other matter. Gravity can act between objects that are not even touching. In fact, gravity can act over very long distances. However, the farther two objects are from each other, the weaker is the force of gravity between them. Less massive objects also have less gravity than more massive objects. 	gravity acts only between objects that are touching	false
Gravity has traditionally been defined as a force of attraction between things that have mass. According to this conception of gravity, anything that has mass, no matter how small, exerts gravity on other matter. Gravity can act between objects that are not even touching. In fact, gravity can act over very long distances. However, the farther two objects are from each other, the weaker is the force of gravity between them. Less massive objects also have less gravity than more massive objects. 	there is gravitational attraction between you and every object around you	true
Weight measures the force of gravity pulling downward on an object. The SI unit for weight, like other forces, is the Newton (N). On Earth, a mass of 1 kilogram has a weight of about 10 Newtons because of the pull of Earths gravity. On the moon, which has less gravity, the same mass would weigh less. Weight is measured with a scale, like the spring scale shown in the Figure 1.1. The scale measures the force with which gravity pulls an object downward. To delve a little deeper into weight and gravity, watch this video: Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	weight is measured with a balance	false
Groups 13-16 of the periodic table (orange in the Figure 1.1) are the only groups that contain elements classified as metalloids. Unlike other groups of the periodic table, which contain elements in just one class, groups 13-16 contain elements in at least two different classes. In addition to metalloids, they also contain metals, nonmetals, or both. Groups 13-16 fall between the transition metals (in groups 3-12) and the nonmetals called halogens (in group 17). 	the groups in question 1 are the only groups in the periodic that contain elements in more than one class	true
Group 13 of the periodic table is also called the boron group because boron (B) is the first element at the top of the group (see Figure 1.2). Boron is also the only metalloid in this group. The other four elements in the groupaluminum (Al), gallium (Ga), indium (In), and thallium (Tl)are all metals. Group 13 elements have three valence electrons and are fairly reactive. All of them are solids at room temperature. 	carbon is a metalloid	false
Group 13 of the periodic table is also called the boron group because boron (B) is the first element at the top of the group (see Figure 1.2). Boron is also the only metalloid in this group. The other four elements in the groupaluminum (Al), gallium (Ga), indium (In), and thallium (Tl)are all metals. Group 13 elements have three valence electrons and are fairly reactive. All of them are solids at room temperature. 	all group 15 elements are very reactive	false
The halogen group is quite diverse. It includes elements that occur in three different states of matter at room temperature. Fluorine and chlorine are gases, bromine is a liquid, and iodine and astatine are solids. Halogens also vary in color, as you can see in the Figure 1.2. Fluorine and chlorine are green, bromine is red, and iodine and astatine are nearly black. Like other nonmetals, halogens cannot conduct electricity or heat. Compared with most other elements, halogens have relatively low melting and boiling points. 	the halogen named astatine is radioactive	true
The halogen group is quite diverse. It includes elements that occur in three different states of matter at room temperature. Fluorine and chlorine are gases, bromine is a liquid, and iodine and astatine are solids. Halogens also vary in color, as you can see in the Figure 1.2. Fluorine and chlorine are green, bromine is red, and iodine and astatine are nearly black. Like other nonmetals, halogens cannot conduct electricity or heat. Compared with most other elements, halogens have relatively low melting and boiling points. 	all halogens are gases at room temperature	false
Sound is a form of energy that travels in waves through matter. The ability to sense sound energy and perceive sound is called hearing. The organ that we use to sense sound energy is the ear. Almost all the structures in the ear are needed for this purpose. Together, they gather sound waves, amplify the waves, and change their kinetic energy to electrical signals. The electrical signals travel to the brain, which interprets them as the sounds we hear. The Figure 1.1 shows the three main parts of the ear: the outer, middle, and inner ear. It also shows the specific structures in each part of the ear. 	the main role of the middle ear is to change sound waves to electrical impulses	false
The outer ear includes the pinna, ear canal, and eardrum. The pinna is the only part of the ear that extends outward from the head. Its position and shape make it good at catching sound waves and funneling them into the ear canal. The ear canal is a tube that carries sound waves into the ear. The sound waves travel through the air inside the ear canal to the eardrum. The eardrum is like the head of a drum. It is a thin membrane stretched tight across the end of the ear canal. The eardrum vibrates when sound waves strike it, and it sends the vibrations on to the middle ear. Q: How might cupping his hands behind his ears help the boy pictured in the opening image hear better? A: His hands might help the pinna of his ears catch sound waves and direct them into the ear canal. 	you perceive a sound as soon as the sound waves strike your eardrum	false
The ear is a complex organ that senses sound energy so we can hear. Hearing is the ability to sense sound energy and perceive sound. All of the structures of the ear that are involved in hearing must work well for a person to have normal hearing. Damage to any of the structures, through illness or injury, may cause hearing loss. Total hearing loss is called deafness. 	loud sounds cause loss of hearing by damaging the tiny bones of the middle ear	false
The most common cause of hearing loss is exposure to loud sounds. Loud sounds can damage hair cells inside the ears. Hair cells change sound waves to electrical signals that the brain can interpret as sounds. Louder sounds, which have greater intensity than softer sounds, can damage hair cells more quickly than softer sounds. You can see the relationship between sound intensity, exposure time, and hearing loss in the following Figure 1.1. The intensity of sounds is measured in decibels (dB). Q: What is the maximum amount of time you should be exposed to a sound as intense as 100 dB? What might make a sound this intense? A: You should be exposed to a 100-dB sound for no longer than 15 minutes. An example of a sound this intense is the sound of a car horn. 	louder sounds damage hearing more quickly than softer sounds	true
Hearing loss caused by loud sounds is permanent. However, this type of hearing loss can be prevented by protecting the ears from loud sounds. People who work in jobs that expose them to loud sounds must wear hearing protectors. Examples include construction workers who work around loud machinery for many hours each day. But anyone exposed to loud sounds for longer than the permissible exposure time should wear hearing protectors. Many home and yard chores and even recreational activities are loud enough to cause hearing loss if people are exposed to them for too much time. You can see examples in the Figure 1.2. 	hearing loss caused by loud sounds is temporary	false
Heat is the transfer of thermal energy between substances. Thermal energy is the kinetic energy of moving particles of matter, measured by their temperature. Thermal energy always moves from matter with greater thermal energy to matter with less thermal energy, so it moves from warmer to cooler substances. You can see this in the Figure particles of the cooler substance. Thermal energy is transferred in this way until both substances have the same thermal energy and temperature. Q: How is thermal energy transferred in an oven? A: Thermal energy of the hot oven is transferred to the cooler food, raising its temperature. 	heat is a form of energy	false
Heat is the transfer of thermal energy between substances. Thermal energy is the kinetic energy of moving particles of matter, measured by their temperature. Thermal energy always moves from matter with greater thermal energy to matter with less thermal energy, so it moves from warmer to cooler substances. You can see this in the Figure particles of the cooler substance. Thermal energy is transferred in this way until both substances have the same thermal energy and temperature. Q: How is thermal energy transferred in an oven? A: Thermal energy of the hot oven is transferred to the cooler food, raising its temperature. 	temperature measures the average kinetic energy of particles	true
Heat is the transfer of thermal energy between substances. Thermal energy is the kinetic energy of moving particles of matter, measured by their temperature. Thermal energy always moves from matter with greater thermal energy to matter with less thermal energy, so it moves from warmer to cooler substances. You can see this in the Figure particles of the cooler substance. Thermal energy is transferred in this way until both substances have the same thermal energy and temperature. Q: How is thermal energy transferred in an oven? A: Thermal energy of the hot oven is transferred to the cooler food, raising its temperature. 	thermal energy always moves from cooler to warmer substances	false
To understand how conduction works, you need to think about the tiny particles that make up matter. The particles of all matter are in constant random motion, but the particles of warmer matter have more energy and move more quickly than the particles of cooler matter. When particles of warmer matter collide with particles of cooler matter, they transfer some of their thermal energy to the cooler particles. From particle to particle, like dominoes falling, thermal energy moves through matter. In the opening photo above, conduction occurs between particles of metal in the cookie sheet and anything cooler that comes into contact with ithopefully, not someones bare hands! 	only the particles of warm matter are in constant random motion	false
To understand how conduction works, you need to think about the tiny particles that make up matter. The particles of all matter are in constant random motion, but the particles of warmer matter have more energy and move more quickly than the particles of cooler matter. When particles of warmer matter collide with particles of cooler matter, they transfer some of their thermal energy to the cooler particles. From particle to particle, like dominoes falling, thermal energy moves through matter. In the opening photo above, conduction occurs between particles of metal in the cookie sheet and anything cooler that comes into contact with ithopefully, not someones bare hands! 	conduction occurs when particles of matter collide	true
Modern home heating systems keep us comfortable in cold weather. We may even depend on them for our survival. But we often take them for granted. Two common types of home heating systems are hot-water and warm-air heating systems. Both types are described below. Thermal energy is the total energy of moving particles of matter. The transfer of thermal energy is called heat. Therefore, a heating system is a system for the transfer of thermal energy. Regardless of the type of heating system in a home, the basic function is the same: to produce thermal energy and transfer it to air throughout the house. 	in a hotwater heating system hot water transfers thermal energy to radiators by thermal radiation	false
Modern home heating systems keep us comfortable in cold weather. We may even depend on them for our survival. But we often take them for granted. Two common types of home heating systems are hot-water and warm-air heating systems. Both types are described below. Thermal energy is the total energy of moving particles of matter. The transfer of thermal energy is called heat. Therefore, a heating system is a system for the transfer of thermal energy. Regardless of the type of heating system in a home, the basic function is the same: to produce thermal energy and transfer it to air throughout the house. 	in both hotwater and warmair heating systems thermal energy is transferred through the air in each room by conduction	false
Hydrocarbons are placed in two different classes: saturated hydrocarbons and unsaturated hydrocarbons. This classification is based on the number of bonds between carbon atoms. Saturated hydrocarbons have only single bonds between carbon atoms, so the carbon atoms are bonded to as many hydrogen atoms as possible. In other words, they are saturated with hydrogen atoms. Unsaturated hydrocarbons have at least one double or triple bond between carbon atoms, so the carbon atoms are not bonded to as many hydrogen atoms as possible. In other words, they are unsaturated with hydrogen atoms. 	hydrocarbons are the simplest type of carbon compounds	true
The size of hydrocarbon molecules influences their properties, including their melting and boiling points. As a result, some hydrocarbons are gases at room temperature, while others are liquids or solids. Hydrocarbons are generally nonpolar, which means that their molecules do not have oppositely charged sides. Therefore, they do not dissolve in water, which is a polar compound. In fact, hydrocarbons tend to repel water. Thats why they are used in floor wax and similar products. 	the size of hydrocarbon molecules influences their melting and boiling points	true
Hydrocarbons are placed in two different classes: saturated hydrocarbons and unsaturated hydrocarbons. This classification is based on the number of bonds between carbon atoms. Saturated hydrocarbons have only single bonds between carbon atoms, so the carbon atoms are bonded to as many hydrogen atoms as possible. In other words, they are saturated with hydrogen atoms. Unsaturated hydrocarbons have at least one double or triple bond between carbon atoms, so the carbon atoms are not bonded to as many hydrogen atoms as possible. In other words, they are unsaturated with hydrogen atoms. 	hydrocarbons consist only of carbon and hydrogen atoms	true
Besides being very reactive, alkali metals share a number of other properties. Alkali metals are all solids at room temperature. Alkali metals are low in density, and some of them float on water. Alkali metals are relatively soft. Some are even soft enough to cut with a knife, like the sodium pictured in the Figure 1.1. 	hydrogen and alkali metals are very reactive	true
Hydrogen is a very reactive gas, and the alkali metals are even more reactive. In fact, they are the most reactive metals and, along with the elements in group 17, are the most reactive of all elements. The reactivity of alkali metals increases from the top to the bottom of the group, so lithium (Li) is the least reactive alkali metal and francium (Fr) is the most reactive. Because alkali metals are so reactive, they are found in nature only in combination with other elements. They often combine with group 17 elements, which are very eager to gain an electron. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the most reactive alkali metal is lithium	false
Hydrogen is a very reactive gas, and the alkali metals are even more reactive. In fact, they are the most reactive metals and, along with the elements in group 17, are the most reactive of all elements. The reactivity of alkali metals increases from the top to the bottom of the group, so lithium (Li) is the least reactive alkali metal and francium (Fr) is the most reactive. Because alkali metals are so reactive, they are found in nature only in combination with other elements. They often combine with group 17 elements, which are very eager to gain an electron. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the alkali metal named francium is radioactive	true
Polar compounds, such as water, are compounds that have a partial negative charge on one side of each molecule and a partial positive charge on the other side. All polar compounds contain polar bonds (although not all compounds that contain polar bonds are polar.) In a polar bond, two atoms share electrons unequally. One atom attracts the shared electrons more strongly, so it has a partial negative charge. The other atom attracts the shared electrons less strongly, so it is has a partial positive charge. In a water molecule, the oxygen atom attracts the shared electrons more strongly than the hydrogen atoms do. This explains why the oxygen side of the water molecule has a partial negative charge and the hydrogen side of the molecule has a partial positive charge. Q: If a molecule is polar, how might this affect its interactions with nearby molecules of the same compound? A: Opposite charges on different molecules of the same compound might cause the molecules to be attracted to each other. 	water is a polar compound	true
Polar compounds, such as water, are compounds that have a partial negative charge on one side of each molecule and a partial positive charge on the other side. All polar compounds contain polar bonds (although not all compounds that contain polar bonds are polar.) In a polar bond, two atoms share electrons unequally. One atom attracts the shared electrons more strongly, so it has a partial negative charge. The other atom attracts the shared electrons less strongly, so it is has a partial positive charge. In a water molecule, the oxygen atom attracts the shared electrons more strongly than the hydrogen atoms do. This explains why the oxygen side of the water molecule has a partial negative charge and the hydrogen side of the molecule has a partial positive charge. Q: If a molecule is polar, how might this affect its interactions with nearby molecules of the same compound? A: Opposite charges on different molecules of the same compound might cause the molecules to be attracted to each other. 	hydrogen bonds are very strong bonds	false
Changes of state from solid to liquid and from liquid to gas occur when matter gains energy. The energy allows individual molecules to separate and move apart from one another. It takes more energy to bring about these changes of state for polar molecules. Although hydrogen bonds are weak, they add to the energy needed for molecules to move apart from one another, so it takes higher temperatures for these changes of state to occur in polar compounds. This explains why polar compounds have relatively high melting and boiling points. The Table 1.1 compares melting and boiling points for some polar and nonpolar covalent compounds. Name of Compound (Chemical Formula) Methane (CH4 ) Ethylene (C2 H2 ) Ammonia (NH3 ) Water (H2 O) Polar or Nonpolar? Melting Point( C) Boiling Point ( C) nonpolar nonpolar polar polar -182 -169 -78 0 -162 -104 -33 100 Q: Which compound in the Table 1.1 do you think is more polar, ammonia or water? 	polar molecules tend to have lower boiling points than nonpolar molecules	false
An inclined plane is a simple machine that consists of a sloping surface connecting a lower elevation to a higher elevation. An inclined plane is one of six types of simple machines, and it is one of the oldest and most basic. In fact, two other simple machines, the wedge and the screw, are variations of the inclined plane. A ramp like the one in the Figure 1.1 is another example of an inclined plane. Inclined planes make it easier to move objects to a higher elevation. The sloping surface of the inclined plane supports part of the weight of the object as it moves up the slope. As a result, it takes less force to move the object uphill. The trade-off is that the object must be moved over a greater distance than if it were moved straight up to the higher elevation. 	an inclined plane is one of six types of simple machines	true
The mechanical advantage of a simple machine is the factor by which it multiplies the force applied to the machine. It is the ratio of output force (the force put out by the machined) to input force (the force put into the machine). For an inclined plane, less force is put into moving an object up the slope than if the object were lifted straight up, so the mechanical advantage is greater than 1. The more gradual the slope of the inclined plane, the less input force is needed and the greater the mechanical advantage. Q: Which inclined plane pictured in the Figure 1.2 has a greater mechanical advantage? A: The inclined plane on the right has a more gradual slope, so it has a greater mechanical advantage. Less force is needed to move objects up the gentler slope, yet the objects attain the same elevation as they would if more force were used to push them up the steeper slope. 	mechanical advantage is the ratio of input force to output force	false
The mechanical advantage of a simple machine is the factor by which it multiplies the force applied to the machine. It is the ratio of output force (the force put out by the machined) to input force (the force put into the machine). For an inclined plane, less force is put into moving an object up the slope than if the object were lifted straight up, so the mechanical advantage is greater than 1. The more gradual the slope of the inclined plane, the less input force is needed and the greater the mechanical advantage. Q: Which inclined plane pictured in the Figure 1.2 has a greater mechanical advantage? A: The inclined plane on the right has a more gradual slope, so it has a greater mechanical advantage. Less force is needed to move objects up the gentler slope, yet the objects attain the same elevation as they would if more force were used to push them up the steeper slope. 	the more gradual the slope of an inclined plane the greater its mechanical advantage is	true
The inertia of an object depends on its mass. Objects with greater mass also have greater inertia. It would be easier for Lauren to push just one of her cousins on her skateboard than both of them. With just one twin, there would be only about half as much mass on the skateboard, so there would be less inertia to overcome. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	only moving objects have inertia	false
Inertia is the tendency of an object to resist a change in its motion. All objects have inertia, whether they are stationary or moving. Inertia explains Newtons first law of motion, which states that an object at rest will remain at rest and an object in motion will stay in motion unless it is acted on by an unbalanced force. Thats why Newtons first law of motion is sometimes called the law of inertia. Q: You probably dont realize it, but you experience inertia all the time, and you dont have to ride a skateboard. For example, think about what happens when you are riding in a car that stops suddenly. Your body moves forward on the seat and strains against the seat belt. Why does this happen? A: The brakes stop the car but not your body, so your body keeps moving forward because of inertia. 	newtons first law of motion is also called the law of inertia	true
To change the motion of an object, inertia must be overcome by an unbalanced force acting on the object. The unbalanced force that starts Laurens cousins rolling along on the skateboard is applied by Lauren when she gives it a push. Once an object starts moving, inertia keeps it moving without any additional force being applied. In fact, it wont stop moving unless another unbalanced force opposes its motion. For example, Lauren can stop the rolling skateboard by moving to the other end and pushing in the opposite direction. Q: What if Lauren didnt stop the skateboard in this way? If it remained on a smooth, flat surface, would it just keep rolling forever? A: The inertia of the moving skateboard would keep it rolling forever if no other unbalanced force opposed its motion. However, another unbalanced force does act on the skateboard Q: What other force is acting on the skateboard? A: The other force is rolling friction between the skateboards wheels and the ground. The force of friction opposes the motion of the rolling skateboard and would eventually bring it to a stop without any help from Lauren. Friction opposes the motion of all moving objects, solike the skateboardall moving objects eventually stop moving even if no other forces oppose their motion. Later that day, Jonathan rode his skateboard and did some jumps. You can see him in the picture 1.2. When hes in the air, there is no rolling friction between his wheels and the ground, but another unbalanced force is acting on the skateboard and changing its motion. Q: What force is acting on the skateboard when it is in the air above the ground? And how will this force change the skateboards motion? A: The force of gravity is acting on the skateboard. It will pull the skateboard back down to the ground. Once its on the ground, friction will slow its motion. 	once an object starts moving inertia keeps it moving without any additional force being applied to the object	true
The Figure 1.1 shows decibel levels of several different sounds. As decibel levels get higher, sound waves have greater intensity and sounds are louder. For every 10-decibel increase in the intensity of sound, loudness is 10 times greater. Therefore, a 30-decibel quiet room is 10 times louder than a 20-decibel whisper, and a 40-decibel light rainfall is 100 times louder than the whisper. High-decibel sounds are dangerous. They can damage the ears and cause loss of hearing. Q: How much louder than a 20-decibel whisper is the 60-decibel sound of a vacuum cleaner? A: The vacuum cleaner is 10,000 times louder than the whisper! 	an 80decibel sound is 20 times louder than a 60decibel sound	false
The intensity of sound waves determines the loudness of sounds, but what determines intensity? Intensity results from two factors: the amplitude of the sound waves and how far they have traveled from the source of the sound. Amplitude is a measure of the size of sound waves. It depends on the amount of energy that started the waves. Greater amplitude waves have more energy and greater intensity, so they sound louder. As sound waves travel farther from their source, the more spread out their energy becomes. You can see how this works in the Figure 1.2. As distance from the sound source increases, the area covered by the sound waves increases. The same amount of energy is spread over a greater area, so the intensity and loudness of the sound is less. This explains why even loud sounds fade away as you move farther from the source. Q: Why can low-amplitude sounds like whispers be heard only over short distances? A: The sound waves already have so little energy that spreading them out over a wider area quickly reduces their intensity below the level of hearing. 	as distance from the sound source increases the area covered by the sound waves decreases	false
Loudness refers to how loud or soft a sound seems to a listener. The loudness of sound is determined, in turn, by the intensity of the sound waves. Intensity is a measure of the amount of energy in sound waves. The unit of intensity is the decibel (dB). 	amplitude is a measure of the size of sound waves	true
Most cars have at least four cylinders connected to the crankshaft. Their pistons move up and down in sequence, one after the other. A powerful car may have eight pistons, and some race cars may have even more. The more cylinders a car engine has, the more powerful its engine can be. 	all cars have at least eight cylinders	false
Most cars have at least four cylinders connected to the crankshaft. Their pistons move up and down in sequence, one after the other. A powerful car may have eight pistons, and some race cars may have even more. The more cylinders a car engine has, the more powerful its engine can be. 	the more pistons a car has the greater the cars power is	true
In the Table 1.2, two basic SI units are compared with their English system equivalents. You can use the information in the table to convert SI units to English units or vice versa. For example, from the table you know that 1 meter equals 39.37 inches. How many inches are there in 3 meters? 3 m = 3(39.37 in) = 118.11 in Measure Length Mass SI Unit meter (m) kilogram (kg) English Unit Equivalent 1 m = 39.37 in 1 kg = 2.20 lb Q: Rod needs to buy a meter of wire for a science experiment, but the wire is sold only by the yard. If he buys a yard of wire, will he have enough? (Hint: There are 36 inches in a yard.) A: Rod needs 39.37 inches (a meter) of wire, but a yard is only 36 inches, so if he buys a yard of wire he wont have enough. 	a kilogram equals onethousandth of a gram	false
An ionic bond is the force of attraction that holds together positive and negative ions. It forms when atoms of a metallic element give up electrons to atoms of a nonmetallic element. The Figure 1.1 shows how this happens. In row 1 of the Figure 1.1, an atom of sodium (Na) donates an electron to an atom of chlorine (Cl). By losing an electron, the sodium atom becomes a sodium ion. It now has more protons than electrons and a charge of +1. Positive ions such as sodium are given the same name as the element. The chemical symbol has a plus sign to distinguish the ion from an atom of the element. The symbol for a sodium ion is Na+ . By gaining an electron, the chlorine atom becomes a chloride ion. It now has more electrons than protons and a charge of -1. Negative ions are named by adding the suffix -ide to the first part of the element name. The symbol for chloride is Cl . Sodium and chloride ions have equal but opposite charges. Opposite electric charges attract each other, so sodium and chloride ions cling together in a strong ionic bond. You can see this in row 2 of the Figure 1.1. (Brackets separate the ions in the diagram to show that the ions in the compound do not actually share electrons.) When ionic bonds hold ions together, they form an ionic compound. The compound formed from sodium and chloride ions is named sodium chloride. It is commonly called table salt. 	in an ionic bond the metallic ion is always a positive ion	true
An ionic bond is the force of attraction that holds together positive and negative ions. It forms when atoms of a metallic element give up electrons to atoms of a nonmetallic element. The Figure 1.1 shows how this happens. In row 1 of the Figure 1.1, an atom of sodium (Na) donates an electron to an atom of chlorine (Cl). By losing an electron, the sodium atom becomes a sodium ion. It now has more protons than electrons and a charge of +1. Positive ions such as sodium are given the same name as the element. The chemical symbol has a plus sign to distinguish the ion from an atom of the element. The symbol for a sodium ion is Na+ . By gaining an electron, the chlorine atom becomes a chloride ion. It now has more electrons than protons and a charge of -1. Negative ions are named by adding the suffix -ide to the first part of the element name. The symbol for chloride is Cl . Sodium and chloride ions have equal but opposite charges. Opposite electric charges attract each other, so sodium and chloride ions cling together in a strong ionic bond. You can see this in row 2 of the Figure 1.1. (Brackets separate the ions in the diagram to show that the ions in the compound do not actually share electrons.) When ionic bonds hold ions together, they form an ionic compound. The compound formed from sodium and chloride ions is named sodium chloride. It is commonly called table salt. 	positive ions are named by adding the suffix ide to the first part of the element name	false
Ionic bonds form only between metals and nonmetals. Thats because metals want to give up electrons, and nonmetals want to gain electrons. Find sodium (Na) in the Figure 1.2. Sodium is an alkali metal in group 1. Like all group 1 elements, it has just one valence electron. If sodium loses that one electron, it will have a full outer energy level, which is the most stable arrangement of electrons. Now find fluorine (F) in the periodic table Figure gains one electron, it will also have a full outer energy level and the most stable arrangement of electrons. Q: Predict what other elements might form ionic bonds. A: Metals on the left and in the center of the periodic table form ionic bonds with nonmetals on the right of the periodic table. For example, alkali metals in group 1 form ionic bonds with halogen nonmetals in group 17. 	ionic bonds form only between metals and nonmetals	true
Ionic compounds have many uses. Some are shown in the Figure 1.2. Many ionic compounds are used in industry. The human body needs several ions for good health. Having low levels of the ions can endanger important functions such as heartbeat. Solutions of ionic compounds can be used to restore the ions. 	ionic compounds form when ions of two different elements share electrons	false
Ionic compounds are named for their positive and negative ions. The name of the positive ion always comes first, followed by the name of the negative ion. For example, positive sodium ions and negative chloride ions form the compound named sodium chloride. Similarly, positive calcium ions and negative chloride ions form the compound named calcium chloride. Q: What is the name of the ionic compound that is composed of positive barium ions and negative iodide ions? A: The compound is named barium iodide. 	an ionic compound is always neutral in charge	true
The process in which an atom becomes an ion is called ionization. It may occur when atoms are exposed to high levels of radiation. The radiation may give their outer electrons enough energy to escape from the attraction of the positive nucleus. However, most ions form when atoms transfer electrons to or from other atoms or molecules. For example, sodium atoms may transfer electrons to chlorine atoms. This forms positive sodium ions (Na+ ) and negative chloride ions (Cl ). Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the process in which ions form is called ionization	true
Atoms cannot only gain extra electrons. They can also lose electrons. In either case, they become ions. Ions are atoms that have a positive or negative charge because they have unequal numbers of protons and electrons. If atoms lose electrons, they become positive ions, or cations. If atoms gain electrons, they become negative ions, or anions. Consider the example of fluorine (see Figure 1.1). A fluorine atom has nine protons and nine electrons, so it is electrically neutral. If a fluorine atom gains an electron, it becomes a fluoride ion with an electric charge of -1. 	ions are very unreactive	false
Ions are highly reactive, especially as gases. They usually react with ions of opposite charge to form neutral compounds. For example, positive sodium ions and negative chloride ions react to form the neutral compound sodium chloride, commonly known as table salt. This occurs because oppositely charged ions attract each other. Ions with the same charge, on the other hand, repel each other. Ions are also deflected by a magnetic field, as you saw in the opening image of the northern lights. 	ions are deflected by a magnetic field	true
Butane has only two isomers and pentane has just three, but some hydrocarbons have many more isomers than these. As you increase the number of carbon atoms in a hydrocarbon, the number of isomers quickly increases. For example, heptane, with seven carbon atoms, has nine isomers; and dodecane, with twelve carbon atoms, has 355 isomers. Some hydrocarbons with many more carbon atoms have billions of isomers! Q: Why does the number of carbon atoms in a hydrocarbon determine how many isomers it has? A: The more carbon atoms there are, the greater the number of possible arrangements of carbon atoms. 	only unsaturated hydrocarbons have isomers	false
Butane has only two isomers and pentane has just three, but some hydrocarbons have many more isomers than these. As you increase the number of carbon atoms in a hydrocarbon, the number of isomers quickly increases. For example, heptane, with seven carbon atoms, has nine isomers; and dodecane, with twelve carbon atoms, has 355 isomers. Some hydrocarbons with many more carbon atoms have billions of isomers! Q: Why does the number of carbon atoms in a hydrocarbon determine how many isomers it has? A: The more carbon atoms there are, the greater the number of possible arrangements of carbon atoms. 	some hydrocarbons have billions of isomers	true
Because isomers are different compounds, they have different properties. Generally, branched-chain isomers have lower boiling and melting points than straight-chain isomers. For example, the boiling and melting points of iso- butane are -12  C and -160  C, respectively, compared with 0  C and -138  C for n-butane. The more branching there is, the lower the boiling and melting points are. Q: The boiling point of n-pentane is 36  C. Predict the boiling points of iso-pentane and neo-pentane. A: The boiling point of iso-pentane is 28  C, and the boiling point of neo-pentane is 10  C. 	the more branching an isomer has the lower its melting point is	true
All atoms of the same element have the same number of protons, but some may have different numbers of neutrons. For example, all carbon atoms have six protons, and most have six neutrons as well. But some carbon atoms have seven or eight neutrons instead of the usual six. Atoms of the same element that differ in their numbers of neutrons are called isotopes. Many isotopes occur naturally. Usually one or two isotopes of an element are the most stable and common. Different isotopes of an element generally have the same physical and chemical properties. Thats because they have the same numbers of protons and electrons. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	all isotopes form naturally	false
Atoms need a certain ratio of neutrons to protons to have a stable nucleus. Having too many or too few neutrons relative to protons results in an unstable, or radioactive, nucleus that will sooner or later break down to a more stable form. This process is called radioactive decay. Many isotopes have radioactive nuclei, and these isotopes are referred to as radioisotopes. When they decay, they release particles that may be harmful. This is why radioactive isotopes are dangerous and why working with them requires special suits for protection. The isotope of carbon known as carbon-14 is an example of a radioisotope. In contrast, the carbon isotopes called carbon-12 and carbon-13 are stable. 	all isotopes are radioactive	false
Kinetic energy is the energy of moving matter. Anything that is moving has kinetic energyfrom atoms in matter to stars in outer space. Things with kinetic energy can do work. For example, the spinning saw blade in the photo above is doing the work of cutting through a piece of metal. 	things with kinetic energy can do work	true
Kinetic energy is the energy of moving matter. Anything that is moving has kinetic energyfrom atoms in matter to stars in outer space. Things with kinetic energy can do work. For example, the spinning saw blade in the photo above is doing the work of cutting through a piece of metal. 	an objects mass has a greater influence on its kinetic energy than does its velocity	false
The amount of kinetic energy in a moving object depends directly on its mass and velocity. An object with greater mass or greater velocity has more kinetic energy. You can calculate the kinetic energy of a moving object with this equation: Kinetic Energy (KE) = 12 mass  velocity2 This equation shows that an increase in velocity increases kinetic energy more than an increase in mass. If mass doubles, kinetic energy doubles as well, but if velocity doubles, kinetic energy increases by a factor of four. Thats because velocity is squared in the equation. Lets consider an example. The Figure 1.1 shows Juan running on the beach with his dad. Juan has a mass of 40 kg and is running at a velocity of 1 m/s. How much kinetic energy does he have? Substitute these values for mass and velocity into the equation for kinetic energy: m2 2 KE = 12  40 kg  (1 m s ) = 20 kg  s2 = 20 N  m, or 20 J Notice that the answer is given in joules (J), or N  m, which is the SI unit for energy. One joule is the amount of energy needed to apply a force of 1 Newton over a distance of 1 meter. What about Juans dad? His mass is 80 kg, and hes running at the same velocity as Juan (1 m/s). Because his mass is twice as great as Juans, his kinetic energy is twice as great: m2 2 KE = 12  80 kg  (1 m s ) = 40 kg  s2 = 40 N  m, or 40 J Q: What is Juans kinetic energy if he speeds up to 2 m/s from 1 m/s? A: By doubling his velocity, Juan increases his kinetic energy by a factor of four: m2 2 KE = 12  40 kg  (2 m s ) = 80 kg  s2 = 80 N  m, or 80 J 	energy can be measured in the si unit n  m	true
Energy is the ability to cause changes in matter. For example, your body uses chemical energy when you lift your arm or take a step. In both cases, energy is used to move matteryou. Any matter that is moving has energy just because its moving. The energy of moving matter is called kinetic energy. Scientists think that the particles of all matter are in constant motion. In other words, the particles of matter have kinetic energy. The theory that all matter consists of constantly moving particles is called the kinetic theory of matter. 	the particles of solids do not have enough energy to move	false
Energy is the ability to cause changes in matter. For example, your body uses chemical energy when you lift your arm or take a step. In both cases, energy is used to move matteryou. Any matter that is moving has energy just because its moving. The energy of moving matter is called kinetic energy. Scientists think that the particles of all matter are in constant motion. In other words, the particles of matter have kinetic energy. The theory that all matter consists of constantly moving particles is called the kinetic theory of matter. 	scientists think that the particles of all matter are in constant motion	true
Energy is the ability to cause changes in matter. For example, your body uses chemical energy when you lift your arm or take a step. In both cases, energy is used to move matteryou. Any matter that is moving has energy just because its moving. The energy of moving matter is called kinetic energy. Scientists think that the particles of all matter are in constant motion. In other words, the particles of matter have kinetic energy. The theory that all matter consists of constantly moving particles is called the kinetic theory of matter. 	particles of liquids have enough energy to separate from other liquid particles	false
When skater 2 runs into skater 1, hes going faster than skater 1 so he has more momentum. Momentum is a property of a moving object that makes it hard to stop. Its a product of the objects mass and velocity. At the moment of the collision, skater 2 transfers some of his momentum to skater 1, who shoots forward when skater 2 runs into him. Whenever an action and reaction such as this occur, momentum is transferred from one object to the other. However, the combined momentum of the objects remains the same. In other words, momentum is conserved. This is the law of conservation of momentum. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	when momentum is transferred from one object to another their combined momentum remains the same	true
Reflection is one of several ways that light can interact with matter. Light reflects off surfaces such as mirrors that do not transmit or absorb light. When light is reflected from a smooth surface, it may form an image. An image is a copy of an object that is formed by reflected (or refracted) light. Q: Is an image an actual object? If not, what is it? A: No, an image isnt an actual object. It is focused rays of light that make a copy of an object, like a picture projected on a screen. 	when light reflects off a smooth surface it forms a clear image	true
Reflection is one of several ways that light can interact with matter. Light reflects off surfaces such as mirrors that do not transmit or absorb light. When light is reflected from a smooth surface, it may form an image. An image is a copy of an object that is formed by reflected (or refracted) light. Q: Is an image an actual object? If not, what is it? A: No, an image isnt an actual object. It is focused rays of light that make a copy of an object, like a picture projected on a screen. 	the image formed when light rays are reflected as described in question 5 is blurry or fuzzy	true
One thing is true of both regular and diffuse reflection. The angle at which the reflected rays leave the surface is equal to the angle at which the incident rays strike the surface. This is known as the law of reflection. The law is illustrated in the Figure 1.3. 	the angles of reflection and incidence are measured relative to a line that is parallel to the reflective surface	false
A convex lens is thicker in the middle than at the edges. You can see the shape of a convex lens in the Figure 1.2. A convex lens causes rays of light to converge, or meet, at a point called the focus (F). A convex lens forms either a real or virtual image. It depends on how close the object is to the lens relative to the focus. Q: An example of a convex lens is a hand lens. Which of the three convex lens diagrams in the Figure 1.2 shows how a hand lens makes an image? A: Youve probably looked through a hand lens before. If you have, then you know that the image it produces is right-side up. Therefore, the first diagram must show how a hand lens makes an image. Its the only one that produces a right-side up image. 	a lens reflects light and forms an image	false
A lens is a transparent object with one or two curved surfaces. It is typically made of glass (or clear plastic in the case of a contact lens). A lens refracts, or bends, light and forms an image. An image is a copy of an objected formed by the refraction (or reflection) of visible light. The more curved the surface of a lens is, the more it refracts the light that passes through it. There are two basic types of lenses: concave and convex. The two types of lenses have different shapes, so they bend light and form images in different ways. 	the less curved the surface of a lens is the more the lens refracts light	false
A lens is a transparent object with one or two curved surfaces. It is typically made of glass (or clear plastic in the case of a contact lens). A lens refracts, or bends, light and forms an image. An image is a copy of an objected formed by the refraction (or reflection) of visible light. The more curved the surface of a lens is, the more it refracts the light that passes through it. There are two basic types of lenses: concave and convex. The two types of lenses have different shapes, so they bend light and form images in different ways. 	a concave lens forms only real images	false
All three classes of levers make work easier, but they do so in different ways. When the input and output forces are on opposite sides of the fulcrum, the lever changes the direction of the applied force. This occurs only with first-class levers. When both the input and output forces are on the same side of the fulcrum, the direction of the applied force does not change. This occurs with both second-class and third-class levers. When the input force is applied farther from the fulcrum than the output force is, the output force is greater than the input force, and the ideal mechanical advantage is greater than 1. This always occurs with second-class levers and may occur with first-class levers. When the input force is applied closer to the fulcrum than the output force is, the output force is less than the input force, and the ideal mechanical advantage is less than 1. This always occurs with third-class levers and may occur with first-class levers. When the input and output forces are the same distance from the fulcrum, the output force equals the input force, and the ideal mechanical advantage is 1. This occurs only with first some first-class levers. 	a second class lever always has an ideal mechanical advantage less than 1	false
You may be wondering why you would use a third-class lever when it doesnt change the direction or strength of the applied force. The advantage of a third-class lever is that the output force is applied over a greater distance than the input force. The output end of the lever must move faster than the input end in order to cover the greater distance. Q: A broom is a third-class lever when it is used to sweep a floor (see the Figure 1.1), so the output end of the lever moves faster than the input end. Why is this useful? A: By moving more quickly over the floor, the broom does the work faster. 	a third class lever always applies the output force over a greater distance than the input force	true
Electromagnetic waves are waves that carry energy through matter or space as vibrating electric and magnetic fields. Electromagnetic waves have a wide range of wavelengths and frequencies. Sunlight contains the complete range of wavelengths of electromagnetic waves, which is called the electromagnetic spectrum. The Figure 1.1 shows all the waves in the spectrum. 	sunlight carries the complete range of wavelengths of electromagnetic waves	true
The only light that people can see is called visible light. This light consists of a very narrow range of wavelengths that falls between infrared light and ultraviolet light. Within the visible range, we see light of different wavelengths as different colors of light, from red light, which has the longest wavelength, to violet light, which has the shortest wavelength (see Figure 1.2). When all of the wavelengths of visible light are combined, as they are in sunlight, visible light appears white. 	ultraviolet light can be used to kill bacteria in food	true
Lipids are one of four classes of biochemical compounds, which are compounds that make up living things and carry out life processes. (The other three classes of biochemical compounds are carbohydrates, proteins, and nucleic acids.) Living things use lipids to store energy. Lipids are also the major components of cell membranes in living things. Types of lipids include fats and oils. Fats are solid lipids that animals use to store energy. Oils are liquid lipids that plants use to store energy. Q: Can you name some lipids that are fats? What are some lipids that are oils? A: Lipids that are fats include butter and the fats in meats. Lipids that are oils include olive oil and vegetable oil. Examples of both types of lipids are pictured in the Figure 1.1. 	lipids are biochemical compounds that include fats and oils	true
Lipids consist only or mainly of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. Both fats and oils are made up of long chains of carbon atoms that are bonded together. These chains are called fatty acids. Fatty acids may be saturated or (A) The white bands on these lamb chops are fat. (B) The yellow liquid in this bottle is olive oil. unsaturated. In the Figure 1.2 you can see structural formulas for two small fatty acids, one saturated and one unsaturated. Saturated fatty acids have only single bonds between carbon atoms. As a result, the carbon atoms are bonded to as many hydrogen atoms as possible. In other words, the carbon atoms are saturated with hydrogens. Saturated fatty acids are found in fats. Unsaturated fatty acids have at least one double bond between carbon atoms. As a result, some carbon atoms are not bonded to as many hydrogen atoms as possible. They are unsaturated with hydrogens. Unsaturated fatty acids are found in oils. Q: Both of these fatty acid molecules have six carbon atoms and two oxygen atoms. How many hydrogen atoms does each fatty acid molecule contain? What else is different about the two molecules? A: The saturated fatty acid molecule has 12 hydrogen atoms. This is as many hydrogen atoms as can possibly be bonded to carbon atoms in this molecule. The unsaturated fatty acid molecule has 10 hydrogen atoms, or two less than the maximum possible number. The saturated fatty acid has only single bonds between its carbon atoms. The unsaturated fatty acid has a double bond between two of its carbon atoms. 	lipids known as fats consist of saturated fatty acids	true
Lipids consist only or mainly of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. Both fats and oils are made up of long chains of carbon atoms that are bonded together. These chains are called fatty acids. Fatty acids may be saturated or (A) The white bands on these lamb chops are fat. (B) The yellow liquid in this bottle is olive oil. unsaturated. In the Figure 1.2 you can see structural formulas for two small fatty acids, one saturated and one unsaturated. Saturated fatty acids have only single bonds between carbon atoms. As a result, the carbon atoms are bonded to as many hydrogen atoms as possible. In other words, the carbon atoms are saturated with hydrogens. Saturated fatty acids are found in fats. Unsaturated fatty acids have at least one double bond between carbon atoms. As a result, some carbon atoms are not bonded to as many hydrogen atoms as possible. They are unsaturated with hydrogens. Unsaturated fatty acids are found in oils. Q: Both of these fatty acid molecules have six carbon atoms and two oxygen atoms. How many hydrogen atoms does each fatty acid molecule contain? What else is different about the two molecules? A: The saturated fatty acid molecule has 12 hydrogen atoms. This is as many hydrogen atoms as can possibly be bonded to carbon atoms in this molecule. The unsaturated fatty acid molecule has 10 hydrogen atoms, or two less than the maximum possible number. The saturated fatty acid has only single bonds between its carbon atoms. The unsaturated fatty acid has a double bond between two of its carbon atoms. 	unsaturated fatty acids contain only single bonds between carbon atoms	false
A longitudinal wave is a type of mechanical wave. A mechanical wave is a wave that travels through matter, called the medium. In a longitudinal wave, particles of the medium vibrate in a direction that is parallel to the direction that the wave travels. You can see this in the Figure 1.1. The persons hand pushes and pulls on one end of the spring. The energy of this disturbance passes through the coils of the spring to the other end. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	a longitudinal wave is a type of mechanical wave	true
A longitudinal wave is a type of mechanical wave. A mechanical wave is a wave that travels through matter, called the medium. In a longitudinal wave, particles of the medium vibrate in a direction that is parallel to the direction that the wave travels. You can see this in the Figure 1.1. The persons hand pushes and pulls on one end of the spring. The energy of this disturbance passes through the coils of the spring to the other end. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	in a longitudinal wave particles of the medium vibrate in a direction that is perpendicular to the direction the wave travels	false
Earthquakes cause longitudinal waves called P waves. The disturbance that causes an earthquake sends longitudinal waves through underground rocks in all directions away from the disturbance. P waves are modeled in the Figure Q: Where are the compressions and rarefactions of the medium in this model of P waves? A: The compressions are the places where the vertical lines are closest together. The rarefactions are the places where the vertical lines are farthest apart. 	earthquakes cause longitudinal waves called p waves	true
Earths magnetic poles have switched places repeatedly in the past. As you can see in the Figure 1.1, each time the switch occurred, Earths magnetic field was reversed. The magnetic field is the region around a magnet over which it exerts magnetic force. We think of todays magnetic field direction as normal, but thats only because its what were used to. 	earths magnetic poles have switched places repeatedly in the past	true
Earths magnetic poles have switched places repeatedly in the past. As you can see in the Figure 1.1, each time the switch occurred, Earths magnetic field was reversed. The magnetic field is the region around a magnet over which it exerts magnetic force. We think of todays magnetic field direction as normal, but thats only because its what were used to. 	scientists know for certain why magnetic field reversals occur	false
Scientists dont know for certain why magnetic reversals occur, but there is hard evidence that they have for hundreds of millions of years. The evidence comes from rocks on the ocean floor. Look at Figure 1.2. They show the same ridge on the ocean floor during different periods of time. A. At the center of the ridge, hot magma pushes up through the crust and hardens into rock. Once the magma hardens, the alignment of magnetic domains in the rock is frozen in place forever. Magnetic domains are regions in the rocks where all the atoms are lined up and pointing toward Earths north magnetic pole. B. The newly hardened rock is gradually pushed away from the ridge in both directions as more magma erupts and newer rock forms. The alignment of magnetic domains in this new rock is in the opposite direction, showing that a magnetic reversal has occurred. C. A magnetic reversal occurs again. It is frozen in rock to document the change. Rock samples from many places on the ocean floor show that the north and south magnetic poles reversed hundreds of times over the last 330 million years. The last reversal was less than a million years ago. 	after magma hardens the alignment of magnetic domains reverses with each magnetic field reversal	false
A magnet is an object that attracts certain materials such as iron. Youre probably familiar with common bar magnets, like the one shown in the Figure 1.1. Like all magnets, this bar magnet has north and south magnetic poles. The red end of the magnet is the north pole and the blue end is the south pole. The poles are regions where the magnet is strongest. The poles are called north and south because they always line up with Earths north-south axis if the magnet is allowed to move freely. (Earths axis is the imaginary line around which the planet rotates.) Q: What do you suppose would happen if you cut the bar magnet pictured in the Figure 1.1 along the line between the north and south poles? A: Both halves of the magnet would also have north and south poles. If you cut each of the halves in half, all those pieces would have north and south poles as well. Pieces of a magnet always have both north and south poles no matter how many times you cut the magnet. 	only bar magnets have north and south magnetic poles	false
A magnet is an object that attracts certain materials such as iron. Youre probably familiar with common bar magnets, like the one shown in the Figure 1.1. Like all magnets, this bar magnet has north and south magnetic poles. The red end of the magnet is the north pole and the blue end is the south pole. The poles are regions where the magnet is strongest. The poles are called north and south because they always line up with Earths north-south axis if the magnet is allowed to move freely. (Earths axis is the imaginary line around which the planet rotates.) Q: What do you suppose would happen if you cut the bar magnet pictured in the Figure 1.1 along the line between the north and south poles? A: Both halves of the magnet would also have north and south poles. If you cut each of the halves in half, all those pieces would have north and south poles as well. Pieces of a magnet always have both north and south poles no matter how many times you cut the magnet. 	if you cut a bar magnet in half one half will have just a north pole and the other half will have just a south pole	false
The force that a magnet exerts on certain materials, including other magnets, is called magnetic force. The force is exerted over a distance and includes forces of attraction and repulsion. North and south poles of two magnets attract each other, while two north poles or two south poles repel each other. A magnet can exert force over a distance because the magnet is surrounded by a magnetic field. In the Figure 1.2, you can see the magnetic field surrounding a bar magnet. Tiny bits of iron, called iron filings, were placed under a sheet of glass. When the magnet was placed on the glass, it attracted the iron filings. The pattern of the iron filings shows the lines of force that make up the magnetic field of the magnet. The concentration of iron filings near the poles indicates that these areas exert the strongest force. You can also see how the magnetic field affects the compasses placed above the magnet. When two magnets are brought close together, their magnetic fields interact. You can see how they interact in the Figure 1.3. The lines of force of north and south poles attract each other whereas those of two north poles repel each other. 	when two magnets are brought close together their magnetic fields interact	true
How much a machine changes the input force is its mechanical advantage. Mechanical advantage is the ratio of the output force to the input force, so it can be represented by the equation: Actual Mechanical Advantage = Output force Input force Note that this equation represents the actual mechanical advantage of a machine. The actual mechanical advantage takes into account the amount of the input force that is used to overcome friction. The equation yields the factor by which the machine changes the input force when the machine is actually used in the real world. 	the mechanical advantage of a machine may be less than equal to or greater than 1	true
The energy of a mechanical wave can travel only through matter. The matter through which the wave travels is called the medium (plural, media). The medium in the water wave pictured above is water, a liquid. But the medium of a mechanical wave can be any state of matter, even a solid. Q: How do the particles of the medium move when a wave passes through them? A: The particles of the medium just vibrate in place. As they vibrate, they pass the energy of the disturbance to the particles next to them, which pass the energy to the particles next to them, and so on. Particles of the medium dont actually travel along with the wave. Only the energy of the wave travels through the medium. 	mechanical waves can travel through liquids and gases but not through solids	false
The energy of a mechanical wave can travel only through matter. The matter through which the wave travels is called the medium (plural, media). The medium in the water wave pictured above is water, a liquid. But the medium of a mechanical wave can be any state of matter, even a solid. Q: How do the particles of the medium move when a wave passes through them? A: The particles of the medium just vibrate in place. As they vibrate, they pass the energy of the disturbance to the particles next to them, which pass the energy to the particles next to them, and so on. Particles of the medium dont actually travel along with the wave. Only the energy of the wave travels through the medium. 	particles of the medium actually travel along with a mechanical wave	false
There are three types of mechanical waves: transverse, longitudinal, and surface waves. They differ in how particles of the medium move. You can see this in the Figure 1.1. In a transverse wave, particles of the medium vibrate up and down perpendicular to the direction of the wave. In a longitudinal wave, particles of the medium vibrate back and forth parallel to the direction of the wave. In a surface wave, particles of the medium vibrate both up and down and back and forth, so they end up moving in a circle. Q: How do you think surface waves are related to transverse and longitudinal waves? A: A surface wave is combination of a transverse wave and a longitudinal wave. 	a longitudinal wave is a combination of a transverse wave and a surface wave	false
You can see how Mendeleev organized the elements in the Figure 1.2. From left to right across each row, elements are arranged by increasing atomic mass. Mendeleev discovered that if he placed eight elements in each row and then continued on to the next row, the columns of the table would contain elements with similar properties. He called the columns groups. They are sometimes called families, because elements within a group are similar but not identical to one another, like people in a family. Mendeleevs table of the elements is called a periodic table because of its repeating pattern. Anything that keeps repeating is referred to as periodic. Other examples of things that are periodic include the monthly phases of the moon and the daily cycle of night and day. The term period refers to the interval between repetitions. For example, the moons phases repeat every four weeks. In a periodic table of the elements, the periods are the rows of the table. In Mendeleevs table, each period contains eight elements, and then the pattern repeats in the next row. 	elements in a given period of mendeleevs table have similar properties	false
Did you notice the blanks in Mendeleevs table? They are spaces that Mendeleev left blank for elements that had not yet been discovered when he created his table. He predicted that these missing elements would eventually be discovered. Based on their position in the table, he even predicted their properties. For example, he predicted a missing element in row 5 of group III. He also predicted that the missing element would have an atomic mass of 68 and be a relatively soft metal like other elements in this group. Scientists searched for the missing element, and they found it just a few years later. They named the new element gallium. Scientists searched for the other missing elements in Mendeleevs table and eventually found all of them. An important measure of a good model is its ability to make accurate predictions. This makes it a useful model. Clearly, Mendeleevs periodic table was a useful model. It helped scientists discover new elements and made sense of those that were already known. 	only some of the unknown elements that mendeleev predicted were ever discovered	false
The valence electrons surrounding metal ions are constantly moving. This makes metals good conductors of electricity. The lattice-like structure of metal ions is strong but quite flexible. This allows metals to bend without breaking. Metals are both ductile (can be shaped into wires) and malleable (can be shaped into thin sheets). Q: Look at the metalworker in the Figure 1.2. Hes hammering a piece of hot iron in order to shape it. Why doesnt the iron crack when he hits it? A: The iron ions can move within the sea of electrons around them. They can shift a little closer together or farther apart without breaking the metallic bonds between them. Therefore, the metal can bend rather than crack when the hammer hits it. 	the latticelike structure of a metal consists of negative metal ions in a sea of electrons	false
Metallic bonds are forces of attraction between positive metal ions and the valence electrons that are constantly moving around them (see the Figure 1.1). The valence electrons include their own and those of other, nearby ions of the same metal. The valence electrons of metals move freely in this way because metals have relatively low electronegativity, or attraction to electrons. The positive metal ions form a lattice-like structure held together by all the metallic bonds. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Q: Why do metallic bonds form only in elements that are metals? Why dont similar bonds form in elements that are nonmetals? A: Metal atoms readily give up valence electrons and become positive ions whenever they form bonds. When nonmetals bond together, the atoms share valence electrons and do not become ions. For example, when oxygen atoms bond together they form oxygen molecules in which two oxygen atoms share two pairs of valence electrons equally, so neither atom becomes charged. 	a metallic bond forms when one metal atom shares a pair of electrons with another metal atom	false
Metallic bonds are forces of attraction between positive metal ions and the valence electrons that are constantly moving around them (see the Figure 1.1). The valence electrons include their own and those of other, nearby ions of the same metal. The valence electrons of metals move freely in this way because metals have relatively low electronegativity, or attraction to electrons. The positive metal ions form a lattice-like structure held together by all the metallic bonds. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Q: Why do metallic bonds form only in elements that are metals? Why dont similar bonds form in elements that are nonmetals? A: Metal atoms readily give up valence electrons and become positive ions whenever they form bonds. When nonmetals bond together, the atoms share valence electrons and do not become ions. For example, when oxygen atoms bond together they form oxygen molecules in which two oxygen atoms share two pairs of valence electrons equally, so neither atom becomes charged. 	metallic bonds form only between atoms of two or more different metals	false
How metalloids behave in chemical interactions with other elements depends mainly on the number of electrons in the outer energy level of their atoms. Metalloids have from three to six electrons in their outer energy level. Boron, pictured in the Figure 1.1, is the only metalloid with just three electrons in its outer energy level. It tends to act like metals by giving up its electrons in chemical reactions. Metalloids with more than four electrons in their outer energy level (arsenic, antimony, and tellurium) tend to act like nonmetals by gaining electrons in chemical reactions. Those with exactly four electrons in their outer energy level (silicon and germanium) may act like either metals or nonmetals, depending on the other elements in the reaction. 	the metalloid class is the smallest class of elements	true
Most metalloids have some physical properties of metals and some physical properties of nonmetals. For example, metals are good conductors of both heat and electricity, whereas nonmetals generally cannot conduct heat or electricity. And metalloids? They fall between metals and nonmetals in their ability to conduct heat, and if they can conduct electricity, they usually can do so only at higher temperatures. Metalloids that can conduct electricity at higher temperatures are called semiconductors. Silicon is an example of a semiconductor. It is used to make the tiny electric circuits in computer chips. You can see a sample of silicon and a silicon chip in the Figure 1.2. Metalloids tend to be shiny like metals but brittle like nonmetals. Because they are brittle, they may chip like glass or crumble to a powder if struck. Other physical properties of metalloids are more variable, including their boiling and melting points, although all metalloids exist as solids at room temperature. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	some metalloids are liquids at room temperature	false
Metalloids are the smallest class of elements. (The other two classes of elements are metals and nonmetals). There are just six metalloids. In addition to silicon, they include boron, germanium, arsenic, antimony, and tellurium. Metalloids fall between metals and nonmetals in the periodic table. They also fall between metals and nonmetals in terms of their properties. Q: How does the position of an element in the periodic table influence its properties? A: Elements are arranged in the periodic table by their atomic number, which is the number of protons in their atoms. Atoms are neutral in electric charge, so they always have the same number of electrons as protons. It is the number of electrons in the outer energy level of atoms that determines most of the properties of elements. 	metalloids fall between metals and nonmetals in the periodic table	true
Metals are elements that can conduct electricity. They are one of three classes of elements (the other two classes are nonmetals and metalloids). Metals are by far the largest of the three classes. In fact, most elements are metals. All of the elements on the left side and in the middle of the periodic table, except for hydrogen, are metals. There are several different types of metals, including alkali metals in group 1 of the periodic table, alkaline Earth metals in group 2, and transition metals in groups 3-12. The majority of metals are transition metals. 	metals are the largest of the three classes of elements	true
Metals are elements that can conduct electricity. They are one of three classes of elements (the other two classes are nonmetals and metalloids). Metals are by far the largest of the three classes. In fact, most elements are metals. All of the elements on the left side and in the middle of the periodic table, except for hydrogen, are metals. There are several different types of metals, including alkali metals in group 1 of the periodic table, alkaline Earth metals in group 2, and transition metals in groups 3-12. The majority of metals are transition metals. 	some metals are gases at room temperature	false
To understand why metals can conduct electricity, consider the metal lithium as an example. An atom of lithium is modeled below. Look at lithiums electrons. There are two electrons at the first energy level. This energy level can hold only two electrons, so it is full in lithium. The second energy level is another story. It can hold a maximum of eight electrons, but in lithium it has just one. A full outer energy level is the most stable arrangement of electrons. Lithium would need to gain seven electrons to fill its outer energy level and make it stable. Its far easier for lithium to give up its one electron in energy level 2, leaving it with a full outer energy level (now level 1). Electricity is a flow of electrons. Because lithium (like most other metals) easily gives up its extra electron, it is a good conductor of electricity. This tendency to give up electrons also explains other properties of metals such as lithium. 	the properties of metals depend mainly on their number and arrangement of neutrons	false
Electromagnetic waves carry energy through matter or space as vibrating electric and magnetic fields. Electromag- netic waves have a wide range of wavelengths and frequencies. The complete range is called the electromagnetic spectrum. The Figure 1.1 shows all the waves of the spectrum. The waves used in radar guns are microwaves. 	the electromagnetic spectrum is defined as the full range of colors of visible light	false
Find the microwave in the Figure 1.1. A microwave is an electromagnetic wave with a relatively long wavelength and low frequency. Microwaves are often classified as radio waves, but they have higher frequencies than other radio waves. With higher frequencies, they also have more energy. Thats why microwaves are useful for heating food in microwave ovens. Microwaves have other important uses as well, including cell phone transmissions and radar. These uses are described below. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	microwaves have lower frequencies than other radio waves	false
Cell phone signals are carried through the air as microwaves. You can see how this works in the Figure 1.2. A cell phone encodes the sounds of the callers voice in microwaves by changing the frequency of the waves. This is called frequency modulation. The encoded microwaves are then sent from the phone through the air to a cell tower. From the cell tower, the waves travel to a switching center. From there they go to another cell tower and from the tower to the receiver of the person being called. The receiver changes the encoded microwaves back to sounds. Q: Cell towers reach high above the ground. Why do you think such tall towers are used? A: Microwaves can be interrupted by buildings and other obstructions, so cell towers must be placed high above the ground to prevent the interruption of cell phone signals. 	microwave signals can be interrupted by buildings and other obstructions	true
A mirror is typically made of glass with a shiny metal backing that reflects all the light that strikes it. When a mirror reflects light, it forms an image. An image is a copy of an object that is formed by reflection or refraction. Mirrors may have flat or curved surfaces. The shape of a mirrors surface determines the type of image it forms. For example, some mirrors form real images, and other mirrors form virtual images. Whats the difference between real and virtual images? A real image forms in front of a mirror where reflected light rays actually meet. It is a true image that could be projected on a screen. A virtual image appears to be on the other side of the mirror. Of course, reflected rays dont actually go through the mirror to the other side, so a virtual image doesnt really exist. It just appears to exist to the human brain. Q: Look back at the image of the girl pointing at her image in the mirror. Which type of image is it, real or virtual? A: The image of the girl is a virtual image. It appears to be on the other side of the mirror from the girl. 	the shape of a mirrors surface determines the type of image that it forms	true
The mirror in the opening photo is a plane mirror. This is the most common type of mirror. It has a flat reflective surface and forms only virtual images. The image formed by a plane mirror is also right-side up and life sized. But something is different about the image compared with the real object in front of the mirror. Left and right are reversed. Look at the girl brushing her teeth in the Figure 1.1. She is using her left hand to brush her teeth, but her image (on the left) appears to be brushing her teeth with the right hand. All plane mirrors reverse left and right in this way. The term mirror image refers to how left and right are reversed in an image compared with the object. 	the type of mirror in question 6 always forms real images	false
The mirror in the opening photo is a plane mirror. This is the most common type of mirror. It has a flat reflective surface and forms only virtual images. The image formed by a plane mirror is also right-side up and life sized. But something is different about the image compared with the real object in front of the mirror. Left and right are reversed. Look at the girl brushing her teeth in the Figure 1.1. She is using her left hand to brush her teeth, but her image (on the left) appears to be brushing her teeth with the right hand. All plane mirrors reverse left and right in this way. The term mirror image refers to how left and right are reversed in an image compared with the object. 	the type of mirror in question 8 always forms lifesized images	false
A periodic table is still used today to organize the elements. You can see a simple version of the modern periodic table in the Figure 1.1. The modern table is based on Mendeleevs table, except the modern table arranges the elements by increasing atomic number instead of atomic mass. Atomic number is the number of protons in an atom, and this number is unique for each element. The modern table has more elements than Mendeleevs table because many elements have been discovered since Mendeleevs time. 	the modern periodic table is based on mendeleevs earlier periodic table	true
A periodic table is still used today to organize the elements. You can see a simple version of the modern periodic table in the Figure 1.1. The modern table is based on Mendeleevs table, except the modern table arranges the elements by increasing atomic number instead of atomic mass. Atomic number is the number of protons in an atom, and this number is unique for each element. The modern table has more elements than Mendeleevs table because many elements have been discovered since Mendeleevs time. 	each element has a unique atomic number	true
A periodic table is still used today to organize the elements. You can see a simple version of the modern periodic table in the Figure 1.1. The modern table is based on Mendeleevs table, except the modern table arranges the elements by increasing atomic number instead of atomic mass. Atomic number is the number of protons in an atom, and this number is unique for each element. The modern table has more elements than Mendeleevs table because many elements have been discovered since Mendeleevs time. 	all the periods of the modern periodic table contain the same number of elements	false
Compounds that form from two or more nonmetallic elements, such as carbon and hydrogen, are called covalent compounds. In a covalent compound, atoms of the different elements are held together in molecules by covalent bonds. These are chemical bonds in which atoms share valence electrons. The force of attraction between the shared electrons and the positive nuclei of both atoms holds the atoms together in the molecule. A molecule is the smallest particle of a covalent compound that still has the properties of the compound. The largest, most complex covalent molecules have thousands of atoms. Examples include proteins and carbohy- drates, which are compounds in living things. The smallest, simplest covalent compounds have molecules with just two atoms. An example is hydrogen chloride (HCl). It consists of one hydrogen atom and one chlorine atom, as you can see in the Figure 1.1. 	in covalent compounds elements are held together by the force of attraction between oppositely charged atoms	false
Compounds that form from two or more nonmetallic elements, such as carbon and hydrogen, are called covalent compounds. In a covalent compound, atoms of the different elements are held together in molecules by covalent bonds. These are chemical bonds in which atoms share valence electrons. The force of attraction between the shared electrons and the positive nuclei of both atoms holds the atoms together in the molecule. A molecule is the smallest particle of a covalent compound that still has the properties of the compound. The largest, most complex covalent molecules have thousands of atoms. Examples include proteins and carbohy- drates, which are compounds in living things. The smallest, simplest covalent compounds have molecules with just two atoms. An example is hydrogen chloride (HCl). It consists of one hydrogen atom and one chlorine atom, as you can see in the Figure 1.1. 	covalent compounds form structures called crystals	false
To calculate momentum with the equation above, mass is measured in (kg), and velocity is measured in meters per second (m/s). For example, Cody and his skateboard have a combined mass of 40 kg. If Cody is traveling at a velocity of 1.1 m/s by the time he reaches the bottom of the ramp, then his momentum is: Momentum = 40 kg  1.1 m/s = 44 kg  m/s Note that the SI unit for momentum is kg  m/s. Q: The combined mass of Jerod and his skateboard is 68 kg. If Jerod goes down the ramp at the same velocity as Cody, what is his momentum at the bottom of the ramp? A: His momentum is: Momentum = 68 kg  1.1 m/s = 75 kg  m/s 	all objects with mass have momentum	false
Momentum is a property of a moving object that makes it hard to stop. The more mass it has or the faster its moving, the greater its momentum. Momentum equals mass times velocity and is represented by the equation: Momentum = Mass  Velocity Q: What is Codys momentum as he stands at the top of the ramp? A: Cody has no momentum as he stands there because he isnt moving. In other words, his velocity is zero. However, Cody will gain momentum as he starts moving down the ramp and picks up speed. Q: Codys older brother Jerod is pictured in the Figure 1.1. If Jerod were to travel down the ramp at the same velocity as Cody, who would have greater momentum? Who would be harder to stop? A: Jerod obviously has greater mass than Cody, so he would have greater momentum. He would also be harder to stop. 	the faster an object is moving the harder it is to stop	true
In science, motion is defined as a change in position. An objects position is its location. Besides the wings of the hummingbird in the opening image, you can see other examples of motion in the Figure 1.1. In each case, the position of something is changing. Q: In each picture in the Figure 1.1, what is moving and how is its position changing? A: The train and all its passengers are speeding straight down a track to the next station. The man and his bike are racing along a curving highway. The geese are flying over their wetland environment. The meteor is shooting through the atmosphere toward Earth, burning up as it goes. 	aspects of motion include speed and direction	true
Theres more to motion than objects simply changing position. Youll see why when you consider the following example. Assume that the school bus pictured in the Figure 1.2 passes by you as you stand on the sidewalk. Its obvious to you that the bus is moving, but what about to the children inside the bus? The bus isnt moving relative to them, and if they look at the other children sitting on the bus, they wont appear to be moving either. If the ride is really smooth, the children may only be able to tell that the bus is moving by looking out the window and seeing you and the trees whizzing by. This example shows that how we perceive motion depends on our frame of reference. Frame of reference refers to something that is not moving with respect to an observer that can be used to detect motion. For the children on the bus, if they use other children riding the bus as their frame of reference, they do not appear to be moving. But if they use objects outside the bus as their frame of reference, they can tell they are moving. Q: What is your frame of reference if you are standing on the sidewalk and see the bus go by? How can you tell that the bus is moving? A: Your frame of reference might be the trees and other stationary objects across the street. As the bus goes by, it momentarily blocks your view of these objects, and this helps you detect the bus motion. 	in question 6 the bus drivers frame of reference is the passenger directly behind him	false
Theres more to motion than objects simply changing position. Youll see why when you consider the following example. Assume that the school bus pictured in the Figure 1.2 passes by you as you stand on the sidewalk. Its obvious to you that the bus is moving, but what about to the children inside the bus? The bus isnt moving relative to them, and if they look at the other children sitting on the bus, they wont appear to be moving either. If the ride is really smooth, the children may only be able to tell that the bus is moving by looking out the window and seeing you and the trees whizzing by. This example shows that how we perceive motion depends on our frame of reference. Frame of reference refers to something that is not moving with respect to an observer that can be used to detect motion. For the children on the bus, if they use other children riding the bus as their frame of reference, they do not appear to be moving. But if they use objects outside the bus as their frame of reference, they can tell they are moving. Q: What is your frame of reference if you are standing on the sidewalk and see the bus go by? How can you tell that the bus is moving? A: Your frame of reference might be the trees and other stationary objects across the street. As the bus goes by, it momentarily blocks your view of these objects, and this helps you detect the bus motion. 	in question 6 the frame of reference of an outside observer of the bus might be a house across the street	true
People have been using sound to make music for thousands of years. They have invented many different kinds of musical instruments. Despite their diversity, however, musical instruments share certain similarities. All musical instruments create sound by causing matter to vibrate. The vibrations start sound waves moving through the air. Most musical instruments use resonance to amplify the sound waves and make the sounds louder. Resonance occurs when an object vibrates in response to sound waves of a certain frequency. In a musical instrument such as a drum, the whole instrument and the air inside it may vibrate when the head of the drum is struck. Most musical instruments have a way of changing the frequency of the sound waves they produce. This changes the pitch of the sounds, or how high or low the sounds seem to a listener. 	people have been using sound to make music for thousands of years	true
There are three basic categories of musical instruments: percussion, wind, and stringed instruments. You can read in the Figure 1.1 how instruments in each category make sound and change pitch. Q: Can you name other instruments in each of the three categories of musical instruments? A: Other percussion instruments include drums and cymbals. Other wind instruments include trumpets and flutes. Other stringed instruments include guitars and harps. 	there are a total of 50 different kinds of musical instruments	false
There are three basic categories of musical instruments: percussion, wind, and stringed instruments. You can read in the Figure 1.1 how instruments in each category make sound and change pitch. Q: Can you name other instruments in each of the three categories of musical instruments? A: Other percussion instruments include drums and cymbals. Other wind instruments include trumpets and flutes. Other stringed instruments include guitars and harps. 	all musical instruments make sound by causing something to vibrate	true
A neutron is one of three main particles that make up the atom. The other two particles are the proton and electron. Atoms of all elementsexcept for most atoms of hydrogenhave neutrons in their nucleus. The nucleus is the small, dense region at the center of an atom where protons are also found. Atoms generally have about the same number of neutrons as protons. For example, all carbon atoms have six protons and most also have six neutrons. A model of a carbon atom is shown in the Figure 1.1. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	atoms of all elements have neutrons in their nucleus	false
Unlike protons and electrons, which are electrically charged, neutrons have no charge. In other words, they are electrically neutral. Thats why the neutrons in the diagram above are labeled n0 . The zero stands for zero charge. The mass of a neutron is slightly greater than the mass of a proton, which is 1 atomic mass unit (amu). (An atomic mass unit equals about 1.67  1027 kilograms.) A neutron also has about the same diameter as a proton, or 1.7 1017 meters. 	neutrons have a negative electrical charge	false
Unlike protons and electrons, which are electrically charged, neutrons have no charge. In other words, they are electrically neutral. Thats why the neutrons in the diagram above are labeled n0 . The zero stands for zero charge. The mass of a neutron is slightly greater than the mass of a proton, which is 1 atomic mass unit (amu). (An atomic mass unit equals about 1.67  1027 kilograms.) A neutron also has about the same diameter as a proton, or 1.7 1017 meters. 	a neutron has about the same diameter as a proton	true
All the atoms of a given element have the same number of protons and electrons. The number of neutrons, however, may vary for atoms of the same element. For example, almost 99 percent of carbon atoms have six neutrons, but the rest have either seven or eight neutrons. Atoms of an element that differ in their numbers of neutrons are called isotopes. The nuclei of these isotopes of carbon are shown in the Figure 1.2. The isotope called carbon-14 is used to find the ages of fossils. Q: Notice the names of the carbon isotopes in the diagram. Based on this example, infer how isotopes of an element are named. A: Isotopes of an element are named for their total number of protons and neutrons. Q: The element oxygen has 8 protons. How many protons and neutrons are there in oxygen-17? A: Oxygen-17like all atoms of oxygenhas 8 protons. Its name provides the clue that it has a total of 17 protons and neutrons. Therefore, it must have 9 neutrons (8 + 9 = 17). 	atoms of the same element may differ in their numbers of neutrons	true
Q: How does Nina use Newtons first law to start her skateboard rolling? A: The skateboard wont move unless Nina pushes off from the pavement with one foot. The force she applies when she pushes off is stronger than the force of friction that opposes the skateboards motion. As a result, the force on the skateboard is unbalanced, and the skateboard moves forward. Q: How does Nina use Newtons first law to stop her skateboard? A: Once the skateboard starts moving, it would keep moving at the same speed and in the same direction if not for another unbalanced force. That force is friction between the skateboard and the pavement. The force of friction is unbalanced because Nina is no longer pushing with her foot to keep the skateboard moving. Thats why the skateboard stops. Q: How does Jerod use Newtons first law of motion to change the direction of his skateboard? A: Pressing down on just one side of a skateboard creates an unbalanced force. The unbalanced force causes the skateboard to turn toward the other side. In the picture, Jerod is pressing down with his heels, so the skateboard turns toward his toes. 	if you dont try to stop a rolling skateboard it will keep moving forever	false
Coreys friend Jerod likes to skate on the flat banks at Newtons Skate Park. Thats Jerod in the Figure 1.3. As he reaches the top of a bank, he turns his skateboard to go back down. To change direction, he presses down with his heels on one edge of the skateboard. This causes the skateboard to turn in the opposite direction. 	pressing down on one side of a skateboard causes it to turn toward the opposite side	true
Q: How does Nina use Newtons first law to start her skateboard rolling? A: The skateboard wont move unless Nina pushes off from the pavement with one foot. The force she applies when she pushes off is stronger than the force of friction that opposes the skateboards motion. As a result, the force on the skateboard is unbalanced, and the skateboard moves forward. Q: How does Nina use Newtons first law to stop her skateboard? A: Once the skateboard starts moving, it would keep moving at the same speed and in the same direction if not for another unbalanced force. That force is friction between the skateboard and the pavement. The force of friction is unbalanced because Nina is no longer pushing with her foot to keep the skateboard moving. Thats why the skateboard stops. Q: How does Jerod use Newtons first law of motion to change the direction of his skateboard? A: Pressing down on just one side of a skateboard creates an unbalanced force. The unbalanced force causes the skateboard to turn toward the other side. In the picture, Jerod is pressing down with his heels, so the skateboard turns toward his toes. 	if you run into a curb on a skateboard you will fall forward off your skateboard because there is an unbalanced force applied to your body	false
Newton was the first one to suggest that gravity is universal and affects all objects in the universe. Thats why Newtons law of gravity is called the law of universal gravitation. Universal gravitation means that the force that causes an apple to fall from a tree to the ground is the same force that causes the moon to keep moving around Earth. Universal gravitation also means that while Earth exerts a pull on you, you exert a pull on Earth. In fact, there is gravity between you and every mass around youyour desk, your book, your pen. Even tiny molecules of gas are attracted to one another by the force of gravity. Q: Newtons law of universal gravitation had a huge impact on how people thought about the universe. Why do you think it was so important? A: Newtons law was the first scientific law that applied to the entire universe. It explains the motion of objects not only on Earth but in outer space as well. 	isaac newton was the first person to observe the effects of gravity	false
Newton was the first one to suggest that gravity is universal and affects all objects in the universe. Thats why Newtons law of gravity is called the law of universal gravitation. Universal gravitation means that the force that causes an apple to fall from a tree to the ground is the same force that causes the moon to keep moving around Earth. Universal gravitation also means that while Earth exerts a pull on you, you exert a pull on Earth. In fact, there is gravity between you and every mass around youyour desk, your book, your pen. Even tiny molecules of gas are attracted to one another by the force of gravity. Q: Newtons law of universal gravitation had a huge impact on how people thought about the universe. Why do you think it was so important? A: Newtons law was the first scientific law that applied to the entire universe. It explains the motion of objects not only on Earth but in outer space as well. 	newton would agree that all objects on earth exert a gravitational pull on earth	true
Newton was the first one to suggest that gravity is universal and affects all objects in the universe. Thats why Newtons law of gravity is called the law of universal gravitation. Universal gravitation means that the force that causes an apple to fall from a tree to the ground is the same force that causes the moon to keep moving around Earth. Universal gravitation also means that while Earth exerts a pull on you, you exert a pull on Earth. In fact, there is gravity between you and every mass around youyour desk, your book, your pen. Even tiny molecules of gas are attracted to one another by the force of gravity. Q: Newtons law of universal gravitation had a huge impact on how people thought about the universe. Why do you think it was so important? A: Newtons law was the first scientific law that applied to the entire universe. It explains the motion of objects not only on Earth but in outer space as well. 	newtons law of gravity was the first scientific law that applied to everything in the universe	true
Whenever an object speeds up, slows down, or changes direction, it accelerates. Acceleration occurs whenever an unbalanced force acts on an object. Two factors affect the acceleration of an object: the net force acting on the object and the objects mass. Newtons second law of motion describes how force and mass affect acceleration. The law states that the acceleration of an object equals the net force acting on the object divided by the objects mass. This can be represented by the equation: Acceleration = or a = Net force Mass F m Q: While Tony races along on his rollerblades, what net force is acting on the skates? A: Tony exerts a backward force against the ground, as you can see in the Figure 1.1, first with one skate and then with the other. This force pushes him forward. Although friction partly counters the forward motion of the skates, it is weaker than the force Tony exerts. Therefore, there is a net forward force on the skates. 	acceleration occurs whenever an object is acted on by an unbalanced force	true
Newtons second law shows that there is a direct relationship between force and acceleration. The greater the force that is applied to an object of a given mass, the more the object will accelerate. For example, doubling the force on the object doubles its acceleration. The relationship between mass and acceleration is different. It is an inverse relationship. In an inverse relationship, when one variable increases, the other variable decreases. The greater the mass of an object, the less it will accelerate when a given force is applied. For example, doubling the mass of an object results in only half as much acceleration for the same amount of force. Q: Tony has greater mass than the other two boys he is racing (pictured in the opening image). How will this affect his acceleration around the track? A: Tonys greater mass will result in less acceleration for the same amount of force. 	there is a direct relationship between acceleration and mass	false
Newtons second law shows that there is a direct relationship between force and acceleration. The greater the force that is applied to an object of a given mass, the more the object will accelerate. For example, doubling the force on the object doubles its acceleration. The relationship between mass and acceleration is different. It is an inverse relationship. In an inverse relationship, when one variable increases, the other variable decreases. The greater the mass of an object, the less it will accelerate when a given force is applied. For example, doubling the mass of an object results in only half as much acceleration for the same amount of force. Q: Tony has greater mass than the other two boys he is racing (pictured in the opening image). How will this affect his acceleration around the track? A: Tonys greater mass will result in less acceleration for the same amount of force. 	increasing the force acting on an object increases its acceleration	true
Newtons third law of motion explains how Jerod starts his skateboard moving. This law states that every action has an equal and opposite reaction. This means that forces always act in pairs. First an action occursJerod pushes against the ground with his foot. Then a reaction occursJerod moves forward on his skateboard. The reaction is always equal in strength to the action but in the opposite direction. Q: If Jerod pushes against the ground with greater force, how will this affect his forward motion? A: His action force will be greater, so the reaction force will be greater as well. Jerod will be pushed forward with more force, and this will make him go faster and farther. 	forces always act in pairs	true
Newtons third law of motion explains how Jerod starts his skateboard moving. This law states that every action has an equal and opposite reaction. This means that forces always act in pairs. First an action occursJerod pushes against the ground with his foot. Then a reaction occursJerod moves forward on his skateboard. The reaction is always equal in strength to the action but in the opposite direction. Q: If Jerod pushes against the ground with greater force, how will this affect his forward motion? A: His action force will be greater, so the reaction force will be greater as well. Jerod will be pushed forward with more force, and this will make him go faster and farther. 	a stronger action always results in a stronger reaction	true
Because action and reaction forces are equal and opposite, you might think they would cancel out, as balanced forces do. But you would be wrong. Balanced forces are equal and opposite forces that act on the same object. Thats why they cancel out. Action-reaction forces are equal and opposite forces that act on different objects, so they dont cancel out. In fact, they often result in motion. Think about Jerod again. He applies force with his foot to the ground, whereas the ground applies force to Jerod and the skateboard, causing them to move forward. Q: Actions and reactions occur all the time. Can you think of an example in your daily life? A: Heres one example. If you lean on something like a wall or your locker, you are applying force to it. The wall or locker applies an equal and opposite force to you. If it didnt, you would go right through it or else it would tip over. 	action and reaction forces always cancel each other out	false
Because action and reaction forces are equal and opposite, you might think they would cancel out, as balanced forces do. But you would be wrong. Balanced forces are equal and opposite forces that act on the same object. Thats why they cancel out. Action-reaction forces are equal and opposite forces that act on different objects, so they dont cancel out. In fact, they often result in motion. Think about Jerod again. He applies force with his foot to the ground, whereas the ground applies force to Jerod and the skateboard, causing them to move forward. Q: Actions and reactions occur all the time. Can you think of an example in your daily life? A: Heres one example. If you lean on something like a wall or your locker, you are applying force to it. The wall or locker applies an equal and opposite force to you. If it didnt, you would go right through it or else it would tip over. 	action and reaction forces always act on the same object	false
Because the noble gases are the least reactive of all elements, their eight valence electrons are used as the standard for nonreactivity and to explain how other elements interact. This is stated as the octet (group of eight) rule. According to this rule, atoms react to form compounds that allow them to have a group of eight valence electrons like the noble gases. For example, sodium (with one valence electron) reacts with chlorine (with seven valence electrons) to form the stable compound sodium chloride (table salt). In this reaction, sodium donates an electron and chlorine accepts it, giving each element an octet of valence electrons. 	noble gases are the elements in group 17 of the periodic table	false
Noble gases are the least reactive of all known elements. Thats because with eight valence electrons, their outer energy levels are full. The only exception is helium, which has just two electrons. But helium also has a full outer energy level, because its only energy level (energy level 1) can hold a maximum of two electrons. A full outer energy level is the most stable arrangement of electrons. As a result, noble gases cannot become more stable by reacting with other elements and gaining or losing valence electrons. Therefore, noble gases are rarely involved in chemical reactions and almost never form compounds with other elements. 	noble gases are nonreactive elements	true
Noble gases are nonreactive, nonmetallic elements in group 18 of the periodic table. As you can see in the periodic table below, noble gases include helium (He), neon (Ne), argon (Ar), krypton (Kr), xenon (Xe), and radon (Rn). All noble gases are colorless and odorless. They also have low boiling points, explaining why they are gases at room temperature. Radon, at the bottom of the group, is radioactive, so it constantly decays to other elements. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Q: Based on their position in the periodic table (Figure 1.1), how many valence electrons do you think noble gases have? A: The number of valence electrons starts at one for elements in group 1. It then increases by one from left to right across each period (row) of the periodic table for groups 1-2 and 13-18 (numbered 3-0 in the table above). Therefore, noble gases have eight valence electrons. 	noble gases have high boiling points	false
Like most other nonmetals, fluorine cannot conduct electricity, and its electrons explain this as well. An electric current is a flow of electrons. Elements that readily give up electrons (the metals) can carry electric current because their electrons can flow freely. Elements that gain electrons instead of giving them up cannot carry electric current. They hold onto their electrons so they cannot flow. 	there are fewer nonmetals than there are elements in any other class	false
As their name suggests, nonmetals generally have properties that are very different from the properties of metals. Properties of nonmetals include a relatively low boiling point, which explains why many of them are gases at room temperature. However, some nonmetals are solids at room temperature, including the three pictured above, and one nonmetalbromineis a liquid at room temperature. Other properties of nonmetals are illustrated and described in the Figure 1.1. 	all nonmetals are very reactive	false
Nonmetals are elements that generally do not conduct electricity. They are one of three classes of elements (the other two classes are metals and metalloids.) Nonmetals are the second largest of the three classes after metals. They are the elements located on the right side of the periodic table. Q: From left to right across each period (row) of the periodic table, each element has atoms with one more proton and one more electron than the element before it. How might this be related to the properties of nonmetals? A: Because nonmetals are on the right side of the periodic table, they have more electrons in their outer energy level than elements on the left side or in the middle of the periodic table. The number of electrons in the outer energy level of an atom determines many of its properties. 	nonmetals are located on the right side of the periodic table	true
Like most other nonmetals, fluorine cannot conduct electricity, and its electrons explain this as well. An electric current is a flow of electrons. Elements that readily give up electrons (the metals) can carry electric current because their electrons can flow freely. Elements that gain electrons instead of giving them up cannot carry electric current. They hold onto their electrons so they cannot flow. 	most of the elements that make up the human body are nonmetals	true
If a nuclear chain reaction is uncontrolled, it produces a lot of energy all at once. This is what happens in an atomic bomb. However, if a nuclear chain reaction is controlled, it produces energy much more slowly. This is what occurs in a nuclear power plant. The reaction is controlled by inserting rods of nonfissioning material into the fissioning material. You can see this in the Figure 1.4. The radiation from the controlled fission is used to heat water and turn it to steam. The steam is under pressure and causes a turbine to spin. The spinning turbine runs a generator, which produces electricity. 	in a nuclear power plant the energy from nuclear reactions is used to boil water	true
In the U.S., the majority of electricity is produced by burning coal or other fossil fuels. This causes air pollution that harms the health of living things. The air pollution also causes acid rain and contributes to global warming. In addition, fossil fuels are nonrenewable resources, so if we keep using them, they will eventually run out. The main advantage of nuclear energy is that it doesnt release air pollution or cause the other environmental problems associated with the burning of fossil fuels. On the other other hand, radioactive elements are nonrenewable like fossil fuels and could eventually be used up. The main concern over the use of nuclear energy is the risk of radiation. Accidents at nuclear power plants can release harmful radiation that endangers people and other living things. Even without accidents, the used fuel that is left after nuclear fission reactions is still radioactive and very dangerous. It takes thousands of years for it to decay until it no longer releases harmful radiation. Therefore, used fuel must be stored securely to protect people and other living things. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	nuclear power plants do not produce air pollution	true
Nuclear fission is the splitting of the nucleus of a radioactive atom into two smaller nuclei. This type of reaction releases a great deal of energy from a very small amount of matter. Fission of a tiny pellet of radioactive uranium- 235, like the one pictured in the Figure 1.1, releases as much energy as burning 1,000 kilograms of coal! Q: What causes the nucleus of uranium-235 atom to fission? A: Another particle collides with it. 	nuclear energy is a renewable energy resource	false
In nuclear fusion, two or more small nuclei combine to form a single, larger nucleus. You can see an example in the Figure 1.1. In this example, nuclei of two hydrogen isotopes (tritium and deuterium) fuse to form a helium nucleus. A neutron and a tremendous amount of energy are also released. 	nuclear fusion produces dangerous radioactive wastes	false
In nuclear fusion, two or more small nuclei combine to form a single, larger nucleus. You can see an example in the Figure 1.1. In this example, nuclei of two hydrogen isotopes (tritium and deuterium) fuse to form a helium nucleus. A neutron and a tremendous amount of energy are also released. 	the fuel needed for nuclear fusion is plentiful	true
In nuclear fusion, two or more small nuclei combine to form a single, larger nucleus. You can see an example in the Figure 1.1. In this example, nuclei of two hydrogen isotopes (tritium and deuterium) fuse to form a helium nucleus. A neutron and a tremendous amount of energy are also released. 	scientists are a long way from developing the technology needed to use nuclear fusion to produce electricity	true
Nucleic acids are one of four classes of biochemical compounds. (The other three classes are carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids.) Nucleic acids include RNA (ribonucleic acid) as well as DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid). Both types of nucleic acids contain the elements carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and phosphorus. Q: Which of the elements in DNA is not identified with any other class of biochemical compounds? A: All biochemical compounds contain carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen; and proteins as well as nucleic acids contain nitrogen. Phosphorus is the only element that is identified with nucleic acids. 	the backbone of a nucleic acid consists of alternating nitrogen bases	false
DNA stores genetic information in the cells of all living things. It contains the genetic code. This is the code that instructs cells how to make proteins. The instructions are encoded in the sequence of nitrogen bases in the nucleotide chains of DNA. RNA copies and interprets the genetic code in DNA and is also involved in the synthesis of proteins based on the code. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Q: DNA is found only in the nucleus of cells, but proteins are synthesized in the cytoplasm of cells, outside of the nucleus. How do you think the instructions encoded in DNA reach the cytoplasm so they can be used to make proteins? A: After RNA copies the instructions in DNA, it carries them from the nucleus to a site of protein synthesis in the cytoplasm, where the instructions are translated into a protein. 	dna is found only in the nucleus of cells	true
Optics is the study of visible light and the ways it can be used to extend human vision and do other tasks. Knowledge of light was needed for the invention of optical instruments such as microscopes, telescopes, and cameras, in addition to optical fibers. These instruments use mirrors and lenses to reflect and refract light and form images. Q: What is an image? A: An image is a copy of an object created by the reflection or refraction of visible light. 	optical instruments use lenses and mirrors to form images	true
A light microscope is an instrument that uses lenses to make enlarged images of objects that are too small for the unaided eye to see. A common type of light microscope is a compound microscope, like the one shown in the Figure lenses. The objective lenses are close to the object being viewed. They form an enlarged image of the object inside the microscope. The eyepiece lenses are close to the viewers eyes. They form an enlarged image of the first image. The magnifications of all the lenses are multiplied together to yield the overall magnification of the microscope. Some light microscopes can magnify objects more than 1000 times! Q: How has the microscope advanced scientific knowledge? A: The microscope has revealed secrets of the natural world like no other single invention. The microscope let scientists see entire new worlds, leading to many discoveriesespecially in biology and medicinethat could not have been made without it. Some examples include the discovery of cells and the identification of bacteria and other single-celled organisms. With the development of more powerful microscopes, viruses were discovered and even atoms finally became visible. These discoveries changed our ideas about the human body and the nature of life itself. 	the magnifications of all the lenses of a microscope are added together to yield the overall magnification	false
Just as Earth orbits the sun, the moon also orbits Earth. The moon is affected by Earths gravity more than it is by the gravity of the sun because the moon is much closer to Earth. The gravity between Earth and the moon pulls the moon toward Earth. At the same time, the moon has forward velocity that partly counters the force of Earths gravity. So the moon orbits Earth instead of falling down to the surface of the planet. The Figure 1.2 shows the forces involved in the moons orbital motion around Earth. In the diagram, v represents the forward velocity of the moon, and a represents the acceleration due to gravity between Earth and the moon. The line encircling Earth shows the moons actual orbit, which results from the combination of v and a. 	it takes earth 24 hours to complete each orbit	false
Earth and many other bodiesincluding asteroids, comets, and the other planetsmove around the sun in curved paths called orbits. Generally, the orbits are elliptical, or oval, in shape. You can see the shape of Earths orbit in the Figure 1.1. Because of the suns relatively strong gravity, Earth and the other bodies constantly fall toward the sun, but they stay far enough away from the sun because of their forward velocity to fall around the sun instead of into it. As a result, they keep orbiting the sun and never crash to its surface. The motion of Earth and the other bodies around the sun is called orbital motion. Orbital motion occurs whenever an object is moving forward and at the same time is pulled by gravity toward another object. 	comets do not have orbital motion	false
Earth and many other bodiesincluding asteroids, comets, and the other planetsmove around the sun in curved paths called orbits. Generally, the orbits are elliptical, or oval, in shape. You can see the shape of Earths orbit in the Figure 1.1. Because of the suns relatively strong gravity, Earth and the other bodies constantly fall toward the sun, but they stay far enough away from the sun because of their forward velocity to fall around the sun instead of into it. As a result, they keep orbiting the sun and never crash to its surface. The motion of Earth and the other bodies around the sun is called orbital motion. Orbital motion occurs whenever an object is moving forward and at the same time is pulled by gravity toward another object. 	an object with orbital motion is constantly accelerating	true
The strength of an acid depends on how many hydrogen ions it produces when it dissolves in water. A stronger acid produces more hydrogen ions than a weaker acid. For example, sulfuric acid (H2 SO4 ), which is found in car batteries, is a strong acid because nearly all of it breaks down into ions when it dissolves in water. On the other hand, acetic acid (CH3 CO2 H), which is the acid in vinegar, is a weak acid because less than 1 percent of it breaks down into ions in water. The strength of a base depends on how many hydroxide ions it produces when it dissolves in water. A stronger base produces more hydroxide ions than a weaker base. For example, sodium hydroxide (NaOH), a base in drain cleaner, is a strong base because all of it breaks down into ions when it dissolves in water. Calcium carbonate (CaCO3 ), a base in antacids, is a weak base because only a small percentage of it breaks down into ions in water. 	the strength of an acid depends on how many hydrogen ions it produces when it dissolves in water	true
The strength of an acid depends on how many hydrogen ions it produces when it dissolves in water. A stronger acid produces more hydrogen ions than a weaker acid. For example, sulfuric acid (H2 SO4 ), which is found in car batteries, is a strong acid because nearly all of it breaks down into ions when it dissolves in water. On the other hand, acetic acid (CH3 CO2 H), which is the acid in vinegar, is a weak acid because less than 1 percent of it breaks down into ions in water. The strength of a base depends on how many hydroxide ions it produces when it dissolves in water. A stronger base produces more hydroxide ions than a weaker base. For example, sodium hydroxide (NaOH), a base in drain cleaner, is a strong base because all of it breaks down into ions when it dissolves in water. Calcium carbonate (CaCO3 ), a base in antacids, is a weak base because only a small percentage of it breaks down into ions in water. 	an example of a weak base is sodium hydroxide	true
The strength of acids and bases is measured on a scale called the pH scale, which is shown in the Figure 1.1. By definition, pH represents the acidity, or hydrogen ion (H+ ) concentration, of a solution. Pure water, which is neutral, has a pH of 7. With a higher the concentration of hydrogen ions, a solution is more acidic and has a lower pH. Acids have a pH less than 7, and the strongest acids have a pH close to zero. Bases have a pH greater than 7, and the strongest bases have a pH close to 14. Its important to realize that the pH scale is based on powers of ten. For example, a solution with a pH of 8 is 10 times more basic than a solution with a pH of 7, and a solution with a pH of 9 is 100 times more basic than a solution with a pH of 7. Q: How much more acidic is a solution with a pH of 4 than a solution with a pH of 7? A: A solution with a pH of 4 is 1000 (10  10  10, or 103 ) times more acidic than a solution with a pH of 7. Q: Which solution on the pH scale in the Figure 1.1 is the weakest acid? Which solution is the strongest base? A: The weakest acid on the scale is milk, which has a pH value between 6.5 and 6.8. The strongest base on the scale is liquid drain cleaner, which has a pH of 14. 	acidity is the hydrogen ion concentration of a solution	true
Most of the energy used by living things comes either directly or indirectly from the sun. Thats because sunlight provides the energy for photosynthesis. This is the process in which plants and certain other organisms synthesize glucose (C6 H12 O6 ). The process uses carbon dioxide and water and also produces oxygen. The overall chemical equation for photosynthesis is: 6CO2 + 6H2 O + Light Energy  C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 Photosynthesis changes light energy to chemical energy. The chemical energy is stored in the bonds of glucose molecules. Glucose, in turn, is used for energy by the cells of almost all living things. Photosynthetic organisms such as plants make their own glucose. Other organisms get glucose by consuming plants (or organisms that consume plants). Q: How do living things get energy from glucose? A: They break bonds in glucose and release the stored energy in the process of cellular respiration. 	photosynthesis changes light energy to chemical energy	true
The organisms pictured in the Figures 1.1, 1.2, and 1.3 all use sunlight to make glucose in the process of photo- synthesis. In addition to plants, they include bacteria and algae. All of these organisms contain the green pigment chlorophyll, which is needed to capture light energy. A tremendous amount of photosynthesis takes place in the plants of this lush tropi- cal rainforest. 	photosynthesis takes place in a single chemical reaction	false
The motion of an object can be represented by a position-time graph like Graph 1 in the Figure 1.1. In this type of graph, the y-axis represents position relative to the starting point, and the x-axis represents time. A position-time graph shows how far an object has traveled from its starting position at any given time since it started moving. Q: In the Figure 1.1, what distance has the object traveled from the starting point by the time 5 seconds have elapsed? A: The object has traveled a distance of 50 meters. 	a positiontime graph shows how far an object has traveled at any given time since it started moving	true
The motion of an object can be represented by a position-time graph like Graph 1 in the Figure 1.1. In this type of graph, the y-axis represents position relative to the starting point, and the x-axis represents time. A position-time graph shows how far an object has traveled from its starting position at any given time since it started moving. Q: In the Figure 1.1, what distance has the object traveled from the starting point by the time 5 seconds have elapsed? A: The object has traveled a distance of 50 meters. 	a positiontime graph shows the directions the moving object has traveled relative to the starting position	true
In a position-time graph, the velocity of the moving object is represented by the slope, or steepness, of the graph line. If the graph line is horizontal, like the line after time = 5 seconds in Graph 2 in the Figure 1.2, then the slope is zero and so is the velocity. The position of the object is not changing. The steeper the line is, the greater the slope of the line is and the faster the objects motion is changing. 	the steeper the line on a positiontime graph the faster the objects motion is changing	true
The diver has energy because of her position high above the pool. The type of energy she has is called potential energy. Potential energy is energy that is stored in a person or object. Often, the person or object has potential energy because of its position or shape. Q: What is it about the divers position that gives her potential energy? A: Because the diver is high above the water, she has the potential to fall toward Earth because of gravity. This gives her potential energy. 	a stretched rubber band has potential energy	true
All of the examples of potential energy described above involve movement or the potential to move. The form of energy that involves movement is called mechanical energy. Other forms of energy also involve potential energy, including chemical energy and nuclear energy. Chemical energy is stored in the bonds between the atoms of compounds. For example, food and batteries both contain chemical energy. Nuclear energy is stored in the nuclei of atoms because of the strong forces that hold the nucleus together. Nuclei of radioactive elements such as uranium are unstable, so they break apart and release the stored energy. 	food and batteries both contain potential energy	true
You can probably think of other examples of projectile motion. One is shown in the Figure 1.3. The cannon shoots a ball straight ahead, giving it horizontal motion. At the same time, gravity pulls the ball down toward the ground. Q: How would you show the force of gravity on the cannon ball in the Figure 1.3? A: You would add a line pointing straight down from the cannon to the ground. 	a cannonball shot from a cannon has projectile motion	true
When the archer releases the bowstring, the arrow will be flung forward toward the top of the target where shes aiming. But another force will also act on the arrow in a different direction. The other force is gravity, and it will pull the arrow down toward Earth. The two forces combined will cause the arrow to move in the curved path shown in the Figure 1.1. This type of motion is called projectile motion. It occurs whenever an object curves down toward the ground because it has both a horizontal force and the downward force of gravity acting on it. Because of projectile motion, to hit the bulls eye of a target with an arrow, you actually have to aim for a spot above the bulls eye. You can see in theFigure 1.2 what happens if you aim at the bulls eye instead of above it. 	an object with projectile motion constantly changes direction	true
Acids have many important uses, especially in industry. For example, sulfuric acid is used to manufacture a variety of different products, including paper, paint, and detergent. Some other uses of acids are be seen in the Figure 1.3. 	an example of an acid is hcl	true
Acids have many important uses, especially in industry. For example, sulfuric acid is used to manufacture a variety of different products, including paper, paint, and detergent. Some other uses of acids are be seen in the Figure 1.3. 	all acids taste sour	true
Acids have many important uses, especially in industry. For example, sulfuric acid is used to manufacture a variety of different products, including paper, paint, and detergent. Some other uses of acids are be seen in the Figure 1.3. 	litmus paper is the only indicator of acids	false
Bases are ionic compounds that produce negative hydroxide ions (OH ) when dissolved in water. An ionic com- pound contains positive metal ions and negative nonmetal ions held together by ionic bonds. (Ions are atoms that have become charged particles because they have either lost or gained electrons.) An example of a base is sodium hydroxide (NaOH). When it dissolves in water, it produces negative hydroxide ions and positive sodium ions (Na+ ). This can be represented by the equation: H O 2 NaOH OH + Na+ 	an example of a base is sodium hydroxide naoh	true
Bases are used for a variety of purposes. For example, soaps contain bases such as potassium hydroxide (KOH). Other uses of bases can be seen in the Figure 1.2. 	bases feel slippery to the touch	true
Bases are used for a variety of purposes. For example, soaps contain bases such as potassium hydroxide (KOH). Other uses of bases can be seen in the Figure 1.2. 	bases can react with metals	false
Certain compounds, called indicators, change color when bases come into contact with them, so they can be used to detect bases. An example of an indicator is a compound called litmus. It is placed on small strips of paper that may be red or blue. If you place a few drops of a base on a strip of red litmus paper, the paper will turn blue. You can see this in the Figure 1.1. Litmus isnt the only detector of bases. Red cabbage juice can also detect bases, as you can see in this video. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Drawing of red litmus paper turning blue in a base. 	bases turn red litmus paper blue	true
All electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed through empty space. That speed, called the speed of light, is about 300 million meters per second (3.0 x 108 m/s). Nothing else in the universe is known to travel this fast. The sun is about 150 million kilometers (93 million miles) from Earth, but it takes electromagnetic radiation only 8 minutes to reach Earth from the sun. If you could move that fast, you would be able to travel around Earth 7.5 times in just 1 second! 	all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed through space	true
All electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed through empty space. That speed, called the speed of light, is about 300 million meters per second (3.0 x 108 m/s). Nothing else in the universe is known to travel this fast. The sun is about 150 million kilometers (93 million miles) from Earth, but it takes electromagnetic radiation only 8 minutes to reach Earth from the sun. If you could move that fast, you would be able to travel around Earth 7.5 times in just 1 second! 	higherfrequency electromagnetic waves have less energy	false
Although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed across space, they may differ in their wavelengths, frequencies, and energy levels. Wavelength is the distance between corresponding points of adjacent waves (see the Figure 1.1). Wavelengths of electromagnetic waves range from longer than a soccer field to shorter than the diameter of an atom. Wave frequency is the number of waves that pass a fixed point in a given amount of time. Frequencies of electromagnetic waves range from thousands of waves per second to trillions of waves per second. The energy of electromagnetic waves depends on their frequency. Low-frequency waves have little energy and are normally harmless. High-frequency waves have a lot of energy and are potentially very harmful. Q: Which electromagnetic waves do you think have higher frequencies: visible light or X rays? A: X rays are harmful but visible light is harmless, so you can infer that X rays have higher frequencies than visible light. 	some electromagnetic waves have wavelengths shorter than the diameter of an atom	true
All electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed through empty space. That speed, called the speed of light, is about 300 million meters per second (3.0 x 108 m/s). Nothing else in the universe is known to travel this fast. The sun is about 150 million kilometers (93 million miles) from Earth, but it takes electromagnetic radiation only 8 minutes to reach Earth from the sun. If you could move that fast, you would be able to travel around Earth 7.5 times in just 1 second! 	all electromagnetic waves have frequencies of less than 1000 waves per second	false
Proteins are the most numerous and diverse biochemical compounds, and they have many different functions. Some of their functions include: making up tissues as components of muscle. speeding up biochemical reactions as enzymes. regulating life processes as hormones. helping to defend against infections as antibodies. carrying materials around the body as transport proteins (see the example of hemoglobin in the Figure 1.2). 	proteins are the most numerous and diverse biochemical compounds	true
Hemoglobin is a compound in the class of compounds called proteins. Proteins are one of four classes of biochemi- cal compounds, which are compounds in living things. (The other three classes are carbohydrates, lipids, and nucleic acids.) Proteins contain carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and sulfur. Protein molecules consist of one or more chains of small molecules called amino acids. 	there are hundreds of different amino acids	false
Proteins are the most numerous and diverse biochemical compounds, and they have many different functions. Some of their functions include: making up tissues as components of muscle. speeding up biochemical reactions as enzymes. regulating life processes as hormones. helping to defend against infections as antibodies. carrying materials around the body as transport proteins (see the example of hemoglobin in the Figure 1.2). 	some proteins carry other materials in the blood	true
All protons are identical. For example, hydrogen protons are exactly the same as protons of helium and all other elements, or pure substances. However, atoms of different elements have different numbers of protons. In fact, atoms of any given element have a unique number of protons that is different from the numbers of protons of all other elements. For example, a hydrogen atom has just one proton, whereas a helium atom has two protons. The number of protons in an atom determines the electrical charge of the nucleus. The nucleus also contains neutrons, but they are neutral in charge. The one proton in a hydrogen nucleus, for example, gives it a charge of +1, and the two protons in a helium nucleus give it a charge of +2. 	protons are one of three main types of particles that make up atoms	true
All protons are identical. For example, hydrogen protons are exactly the same as protons of helium and all other elements, or pure substances. However, atoms of different elements have different numbers of protons. In fact, atoms of any given element have a unique number of protons that is different from the numbers of protons of all other elements. For example, a hydrogen atom has just one proton, whereas a helium atom has two protons. The number of protons in an atom determines the electrical charge of the nucleus. The nucleus also contains neutrons, but they are neutral in charge. The one proton in a hydrogen nucleus, for example, gives it a charge of +1, and the two protons in a helium nucleus give it a charge of +2. 	protons are found only in the atomic nucleus	true
All protons are identical. For example, hydrogen protons are exactly the same as protons of helium and all other elements, or pure substances. However, atoms of different elements have different numbers of protons. In fact, atoms of any given element have a unique number of protons that is different from the numbers of protons of all other elements. For example, a hydrogen atom has just one proton, whereas a helium atom has two protons. The number of protons in an atom determines the electrical charge of the nucleus. The nucleus also contains neutrons, but they are neutral in charge. The one proton in a hydrogen nucleus, for example, gives it a charge of +1, and the two protons in a helium nucleus give it a charge of +2. 	protons have less mass than electrons	false
The mechanical advantage of a simple machine such as a pulley is the factor by which the machine changes the force applied to it. The ideal mechanical advantage of a machine is its mechanical advantage in the absence of friction. All machines must overcome friction, so the ideal mechanical advantage is always somewhat greater than the actual mechanical advantage of the machine as it is used in the real world. In a pulley, the ideal mechanical advantage is equal to the number of rope segments pulling up on the object. The more rope segments that are helping to do the lifting work, the less force that is needed for the job. Look at the table of types of pulleys. It gives the ideal mechanical advantage of each type. In the single fixed pulley, only one rope segment pulls up on the load, so the ideal mechanical advantage is 1. In other words, this type of pulley doesnt increase the force that is applied to it. However, it does change the direction of the force. This allows you to use your weight to pull on one end of the rope and more easily raise the load attached to the other end. In the single moveable pulley, two rope segments pull up on the load, so the ideal mechanical advantage is 2. This type of pulley doesnt change the direction of the force applied to it, but it increases the force by a factor of 2. In a compound pulley, two or more rope segments pull up on the load, so the ideal mechanical advantage is 2 or greater than 2. This type of pulley may or may not change the direction of the force applied to itit depends on the number and arrangement of pulleysbut the increase in force may be great. Q: If a compound pulley has four rope segments pulling up on the load, by what factor does it multiply the force applied to the pulley? A: With four rope segments, the ideal mechanical advantage is 4. This means that the compound pulley multiplies the force applied to it by a factor of 4. For example if 400 Newtons of force were applied to the pulley, the pulley would apply 1600 Newtons of force to the load. 	the ideal mechanical advantage of a pulley is equal to the number of rope segments pulling up on the load	true
Some pulleys are attached to a beam or other secure surface and remain fixed in place. They are called fixed pulleys. Other pulleys are attached to the object being moved and are moveable themselves. They are called moveable pulleys. Sometimes, fixed and moveable pulleys are used together. They make up a compound pulley. The three types of pulleys are compared in the Table 1.1. Q: Which type of pulley is the old pulley in the opening image? A: The old pulley is a single fixed pulley. It is securely attached to the beam above it. Type of Pulley How It Works Example Single fixed pul- ley Flagpole pulley No. of Rope Segments Pulling Up 1 Ideal Mechani- cal Advantage 1 Change Direction Force? yes Single moveable pulley Zip-line pulley 2 2 no Compound pulley (fixed & moveable pulleys) Crane pulley 2 2 varies in of 	a moveable pulley changes the direction of the input force	false
Some pulleys are attached to a beam or other secure surface and remain fixed in place. They are called fixed pulleys. Other pulleys are attached to the object being moved and are moveable themselves. They are called moveable pulleys. Sometimes, fixed and moveable pulleys are used together. They make up a compound pulley. The three types of pulleys are compared in the Table 1.1. Q: Which type of pulley is the old pulley in the opening image? A: The old pulley is a single fixed pulley. It is securely attached to the beam above it. Type of Pulley How It Works Example Single fixed pul- ley Flagpole pulley No. of Rope Segments Pulling Up 1 Ideal Mechani- cal Advantage 1 Change Direction Force? yes Single moveable pulley Zip-line pulley 2 2 no Compound pulley (fixed & moveable pulleys) Crane pulley 2 2 varies in of 	a zipline pulley is a moveable pulley	true
A pulley is a simple machine that consists of a rope and grooved wheel. The rope fits into the groove in the wheel, and pulling on the rope turns the wheel. Pulleys are generally used to lift objects, especially heavy objects. The object lifted by a pulley is called the load. The force applied to the pulley is called the effort. Q: Can you guess what the pulley pictured above is used for? A: The pulley is used to lift heavy buckets full of water out of the well. 	all pulleys increase the force applied to the pulley	false
Electromagnetic waves consist of vibrating electric and magnetic fields. They transfer energy across space as well as through matter. Electromagnetic waves vary in their wavelengths and frequencies, and higher-frequency waves have more energy. The full range of wavelengths of electromagnetic waves is called the electromagnetic spectrum. It is outlined in the following Figure 1.1. 	electromagnetic waves vary in their wavelengths and frequencies	true
Electromagnetic waves consist of vibrating electric and magnetic fields. They transfer energy across space as well as through matter. Electromagnetic waves vary in their wavelengths and frequencies, and higher-frequency waves have more energy. The full range of wavelengths of electromagnetic waves is called the electromagnetic spectrum. It is outlined in the following Figure 1.1. 	radio waves have the highest frequencies of all electromagnetic waves	false
Electromagnetic waves consist of vibrating electric and magnetic fields. They transfer energy across space as well as through matter. Electromagnetic waves vary in their wavelengths and frequencies, and higher-frequency waves have more energy. The full range of wavelengths of electromagnetic waves is called the electromagnetic spectrum. It is outlined in the following Figure 1.1. 	radio waves have the least energy of all electromagnetic waves	true
Radioactive decay is the process in which the nuclei of radioactive atoms emit charged particles and energy, which are called by the general term radiation. Radioactive atoms have unstable nuclei, and when the nuclei emit radiation, they become more stable. Radioactive decay is a nuclearrather than chemicalreaction because it involves only the nuclei of atoms. In a nuclear reaction, one element may change into another. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	radioactive decay is a chemical reaction	false
Radioactive decay is the process in which the nuclei of radioactive atoms emit charged particles and energy, which are called by the general term radiation. Radioactive atoms have unstable nuclei, and when the nuclei emit radiation, they become more stable. Radioactive decay is a nuclearrather than chemicalreaction because it involves only the nuclei of atoms. In a nuclear reaction, one element may change into another. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	radioactive decay may change one element into another	true
For an atom of one element to change into a different element, the number of protons in its nucleus must change. Thats because each element has a unique number of protons. For example, lead atoms always have 82 protons, and gold atoms always have 79 protons. Q: So how can one element change into another? A: The starting element must be radioactive, and its nuclei must gain or lose protons. 	certain chemical processes can change one element into another	false
Radioactivity is the ability of an atom to emit, or give off, charged particles and energy from its nucleus. The charged particles and energy are called by the general term radiation. Only unstable nuclei emit radiation. They are unstable because they have too much energy, too many protons, or an unstable ratio of protons to neutrons. For example, all elements with more than 83 protonssuch as uranium, radium, and poloniumhave unstable nuclei. They are called radioactive elements. The nuclei of these elements must lose protons to become more stable. When they do, they become different elements. 	all nuclei emit radiation	false
Radioactivity is the ability of an atom to emit, or give off, charged particles and energy from its nucleus. The charged particles and energy are called by the general term radiation. Only unstable nuclei emit radiation. They are unstable because they have too much energy, too many protons, or an unstable ratio of protons to neutrons. For example, all elements with more than 83 protonssuch as uranium, radium, and poloniumhave unstable nuclei. They are called radioactive elements. The nuclei of these elements must lose protons to become more stable. When they do, they become different elements. 	all elements with more than 75 protons are unstable	false
In elements with more than 83 protons, all of the isotopes are radioactive. In the Figure 1.1, these are the elements with a yellow background. The force of repulsion among all those protons makes the nuclei unstable. Elements with more than 92 protons have such unstable nuclei that they dont even exist in nature. They have only been created in labs. 	only radioactive elements have isotopes that are radioactive	false
In elements with more than 83 protons, all of the isotopes are radioactive. In the Figure 1.1, these are the elements with a yellow background. The force of repulsion among all those protons makes the nuclei unstable. Elements with more than 92 protons have such unstable nuclei that they dont even exist in nature. They have only been created in labs. 	radioactive isotopes are unstable because they have too many electrons	false
The relationship between reactants and products in a chemical reaction can be represented by a chemical equation that has this general form: Reactants  Products The arrow () shows the direction in which the reaction occurs. In many reactions, the reaction also occurs in the opposite direction. This is represented with another arrow pointing in the opposite direction (). Q: Write a general chemical equation for the reaction that occurs when a fuel such as candle wax burns. A: The burning of fuel is a combustion reaction. The general equation for this type of reaction is: Fuel + O2  CO2 + H2 O Q: How do the reactants in a chemical reaction turn into the products? A: Bonds break in the reactants, and new bonds form in the products. 	chemical changes occur because of chemical reactions	true
All chemical reactionsincluding a candle burninginvolve reactants and products. Reactants are substances that start a chemical reaction. Products are substances that are produced in the reaction. When a candle burns, the reactants are fuel (the candlewick and wax) and oxygen (in the air). The products are carbon dioxide gas and water vapor. 	an example of a chemical change is a candle burning	true
A change in color is just one of several potential signs that a chemical reaction has occurred. Other potential signs include: Change in temperature-Heat is released or absorbed during the reaction. Production of a gas-Gas bubbles are released during the reaction. Production of a solid-A solid settles out of a liquid solution. The solid is called a precipitate. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	all changes in matter are the result of chemical reactions	false
A change in color is just one of several potential signs that a chemical reaction has occurred. Other potential signs include: Change in temperature-Heat is released or absorbed during the reaction. Production of a gas-Gas bubbles are released during the reaction. Production of a solid-A solid settles out of a liquid solution. The solid is called a precipitate. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the solid lumps in cottage cheese are an example of a precipitate	true
A change in color is just one of several potential signs that a chemical reaction has occurred. Other potential signs include: Change in temperature-Heat is released or absorbed during the reaction. Production of a gas-Gas bubbles are released during the reaction. Production of a solid-A solid settles out of a liquid solution. The solid is called a precipitate. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the release of gas bubbles is a sign of a chemical reaction	true
A replacement reaction occurs when elements switch places in compounds. This type of reaction involves ions (electrically charged versions of atoms) and ionic compounds. These are compounds in which positive ions of a metal and negative ions of a nonmetal are held together by ionic bonds. Generally, a more reactive element replaces an element that is less reactive, and the less reactive element is set free from the compound. There are two types of replacement reactions: single and double. Both types are described below. Q: Can you predict how single and double replacement reactions differ? A: One way they differ is that a single replacement reaction involves one reactant compound, whereas a double replacement reaction involves two reactant compounds. Keep reading to learn more about these two types of reactions. 	less reactive elements replace more reactive elements in compounds	false
A replacement reaction occurs when elements switch places in compounds. This type of reaction involves ions (electrically charged versions of atoms) and ionic compounds. These are compounds in which positive ions of a metal and negative ions of a nonmetal are held together by ionic bonds. Generally, a more reactive element replaces an element that is less reactive, and the less reactive element is set free from the compound. There are two types of replacement reactions: single and double. Both types are described below. Q: Can you predict how single and double replacement reactions differ? A: One way they differ is that a single replacement reaction involves one reactant compound, whereas a double replacement reaction involves two reactant compounds. Keep reading to learn more about these two types of reactions. 	replacement reactions always involve ionic compounds	true
A replacement reaction occurs when elements switch places in compounds. This type of reaction involves ions (electrically charged versions of atoms) and ionic compounds. These are compounds in which positive ions of a metal and negative ions of a nonmetal are held together by ionic bonds. Generally, a more reactive element replaces an element that is less reactive, and the less reactive element is set free from the compound. There are two types of replacement reactions: single and double. Both types are described below. Q: Can you predict how single and double replacement reactions differ? A: One way they differ is that a single replacement reaction involves one reactant compound, whereas a double replacement reaction involves two reactant compounds. Keep reading to learn more about these two types of reactions. 	a single replacement reaction always involves two reactant compounds	false
Rutherford made the same inferences. He concluded that all of the positive charge and virtually all of the mass of an atom are concentrated in one tiny area and the rest of the atom is mostly empty space. Rutherford called the area of concentrated positive charge the nucleus. He predictedand soon discoveredthat the nucleus contains positively charged particles, which he named protons. Rutherford also predicted the existence of neutral nuclear particles called neutrons, but he failed to find them. However, his student James Chadwick discovered them several years later. 	based on his research rutherford thought that most of an atom consists of empty space	true
Rutherford made the same inferences. He concluded that all of the positive charge and virtually all of the mass of an atom are concentrated in one tiny area and the rest of the atom is mostly empty space. Rutherford called the area of concentrated positive charge the nucleus. He predictedand soon discoveredthat the nucleus contains positively charged particles, which he named protons. Rutherford also predicted the existence of neutral nuclear particles called neutrons, but he failed to find them. However, his student James Chadwick discovered them several years later. 	rutherford predicted the existence of neutrons but failed to find them	true
Saturated hydrocarbons are given the general name of alkanes. The name of specific alkanes always ends in -ane. The first part of the name indicates how many carbon atoms each molecule of the alkane has. The smallest alkane is methane. It has just one carbon atom. The next largest is ethane with two carbon atoms. The chemical formulas and properties of methane, ethane, and other small alkanes are listed in the Table 1.1. The boiling and melting points of alkanes are determined mainly by the number of carbon atoms they have. Alkanes with more carbon atoms generally boil and melt at higher temperatures. Alkane Methane Ethane Propane Butane Pentane Hexane Heptane Octane Chemical Formula CH4 C2 H6 C3 H8 C4 H10 C5 H12 C6 H14 C7 H16 C8 H18 Boiling Point( C) -162 -89 -42 0 36 69 98 126 Melting Point( C) -183 -172 -188 -138 -130 -95 -91 -57 State (at 20  C) gas gas gas gas liquid liquid liquid liquid Q: The Table 1.1 shows only alkanes that have relatively few carbon atoms. Some alkanes have many more carbon atoms. What properties might larger alkanes have? A: Alkanes with more carbon atoms have higher boiling and melting points, so some of them are solids at room temperature. 	methane has a higher boiling point than ethane	false
Saturated hydrocarbons are given the general name of alkanes. The name of specific alkanes always ends in -ane. The first part of the name indicates how many carbon atoms each molecule of the alkane has. The smallest alkane is methane. It has just one carbon atom. The next largest is ethane with two carbon atoms. The chemical formulas and properties of methane, ethane, and other small alkanes are listed in the Table 1.1. The boiling and melting points of alkanes are determined mainly by the number of carbon atoms they have. Alkanes with more carbon atoms generally boil and melt at higher temperatures. Alkane Methane Ethane Propane Butane Pentane Hexane Heptane Octane Chemical Formula CH4 C2 H6 C3 H8 C4 H10 C5 H12 C6 H14 C7 H16 C8 H18 Boiling Point( C) -162 -89 -42 0 36 69 98 126 Melting Point( C) -183 -172 -188 -138 -130 -95 -91 -57 State (at 20  C) gas gas gas gas liquid liquid liquid liquid Q: The Table 1.1 shows only alkanes that have relatively few carbon atoms. Some alkanes have many more carbon atoms. What properties might larger alkanes have? A: Alkanes with more carbon atoms have higher boiling and melting points, so some of them are solids at room temperature. 	some alkanes are solids are room temperature	true
Graphs are very useful tools in science. They can help you visualize a set of data. With a graph, you can actually see what all the numbers in a data table mean. Three commonly used types of graphs are bar graphs, circle graphs, and line graphs. Each type of graph is suitable for showing a different type of data. 	different types of graph are best suited for representing different types of data	true
A model is a representation of an object, system, or process. For example, a road map is a representation of an actual system of roads on the ground. Models are very useful in science. They provide a way to investigate things that are too small, large, complex, or distant to investigate directly. To be useful, a model must closely represent the real thing in important ways, but it must be simpler and easier to understand than the real thing. Q: What might be examples of things that would be modeled in physical science because they are difficult to investigate directly? A: Examples include extremely small things such as atoms, very distant objects such as stars, and complex systems such as the electric grid that carries electricity throughout the country. Q: What are ways that these things might be modeled? A: Types of models include two-dimensional diagrams, three-dimensional structures, mathematical formulas, and computer simulations. Examples of simple two-dimensional models in physical science are described below. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	a chemical equation is an example of a model	true
A model is a representation of an object, system, or process. For example, a road map is a representation of an actual system of roads on the ground. Models are very useful in science. They provide a way to investigate things that are too small, large, complex, or distant to investigate directly. To be useful, a model must closely represent the real thing in important ways, but it must be simpler and easier to understand than the real thing. Q: What might be examples of things that would be modeled in physical science because they are difficult to investigate directly? A: Examples include extremely small things such as atoms, very distant objects such as stars, and complex systems such as the electric grid that carries electricity throughout the country. Q: What are ways that these things might be modeled? A: Types of models include two-dimensional diagrams, three-dimensional structures, mathematical formulas, and computer simulations. Examples of simple two-dimensional models in physical science are described below. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL:  Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	a road map is a threedimensional model	false
The mechanical advantage of a simple machine is the factor by which it multiplies the force applied to the machine. It is the ratio of the output force to the input force. The force applied by the screw (output force) is always greater than the force applied to the screw (input force). Therefore, the mechanical advantage of a screw is always greater than 1. Look at the two screws in the Figure 1.2. In the screw on the right, the threads of the inclined plane are closer together. This screw has a greater mechanical advantage and is easier to turn than the screw on the left, so it takes less force to penetrate the wood with the right screw. The trade-off is that more turns of the screw are needed to do the job because the distance over which the input force must be applied is greater. Q: Why is it harder to turn a screw with more widely spaced threads? A: The screw moves farther with each turn when the threads are more widely space, so more force must be applied to turn the screw and cover the greater distance. 	the input force is applied to the inclined plane of a screw	true
The mechanical advantage of a simple machine is the factor by which it multiplies the force applied to the machine. It is the ratio of the output force to the input force. The force applied by the screw (output force) is always greater than the force applied to the screw (input force). Therefore, the mechanical advantage of a screw is always greater than 1. Look at the two screws in the Figure 1.2. In the screw on the right, the threads of the inclined plane are closer together. This screw has a greater mechanical advantage and is easier to turn than the screw on the left, so it takes less force to penetrate the wood with the right screw. The trade-off is that more turns of the screw are needed to do the job because the distance over which the input force must be applied is greater. Q: Why is it harder to turn a screw with more widely spaced threads? A: The screw moves farther with each turn when the threads are more widely space, so more force must be applied to turn the screw and cover the greater distance. 	the mechanical advantage of a screw is always less than 1	false
The mechanical advantage of a simple machine is the factor by which it multiplies the force applied to the machine. It is the ratio of the output force to the input force. The force applied by the screw (output force) is always greater than the force applied to the screw (input force). Therefore, the mechanical advantage of a screw is always greater than 1. Look at the two screws in the Figure 1.2. In the screw on the right, the threads of the inclined plane are closer together. This screw has a greater mechanical advantage and is easier to turn than the screw on the left, so it takes less force to penetrate the wood with the right screw. The trade-off is that more turns of the screw are needed to do the job because the distance over which the input force must be applied is greater. Q: Why is it harder to turn a screw with more widely spaced threads? A: The screw moves farther with each turn when the threads are more widely space, so more force must be applied to turn the screw and cover the greater distance. 	in the picture above it takes it takes more turns of the screw on the right to go the same distance into the wood as the screw on the left	true
When measurements are used in a calculation, the answer cannot have more significant figures than the measurement with the fewest significant figures. This explains why the homework answer above is wrong. It has more significant figures than the measurement with the fewest significant figures. As another example, assume that you want to calculate the volume of the block of wood shown below. The volume of the block is represented by the formula: Volume = length  width  height Therefore, you would do the following calculation: Volume = 1.2 cm  1.0 cm  1 cm = 1.2 cm3 Q: Does this answer have the correct number of significant figures? A: No, it has too many significant figures. The correct answer is 1 cm3 . Thats because the height of the block has just one significant figure. Therefore, the answer can have only one significant figure. 	when measurements are used in a calculation the answer has the same number of significant figures as the measurement with the most signficant figures	false
A machine is any device that makes work easier by changing a force. Work is done whenever a force moves an object over a distance. The amount of work done is represented by the equation: Work = Force x Distance When you use a machine, you apply force to the machine. This force is called the input force. The machine, in turn, applies force to an object. This force is called the output force. The output force may or may not be the same as the input force. The force you apply to the machine is applied over a given distance, called the input distance. The force applied by the machine to the object is also applied over a distance, called the output distance. The output distance may or may not be the same as the input distance. 	work is calculated with the equation work  forcedistance	false
Contrary to popular belief, machines do not increase the amount of work that is done. They just change how the work is done. Machines make work easier by increasing the amount of force that is applied, increasing the distance over which the force is applied, or changing the direction in which the force is applied. Q: If a machine increases the force applied, what does this tell you about the distance over which the force is applied by the machine: A: The machine must apply the force over a shorter distance. Thats because a machine doesnt change the amount of work and work equals force times distance. Therefore, if force increases, distance must decrease. For the same reason, if a machine increases the distance over which the force is applied, it must apply less force. 	a machine increases the amount of work that is done	false
A machine is any device that makes work easier by changing a force. Work is done whenever a force moves an object over a distance. The amount of work done is represented by the equation: Work = Force x Distance When you use a machine, you apply force to the machine. This force is called the input force. The machine, in turn, applies force to an object. This force is called the output force. The output force may or may not be the same as the input force. The force you apply to the machine is applied over a given distance, called the input distance. The force applied by the machine to the object is also applied over a distance, called the output distance. The output distance may or may not be the same as the input distance. 	if a machine increases force it must apply the force over a longer distance	false
In science, sound is defined as the transfer of energy from a vibrating object in waves that travel through matter. Most people commonly use the term sound to mean what they hear when sound waves enter their ears. The tree above generated sound waves when it fell to the ground, so it made sound according to the scientific definition. But the sound wasnt detected by a persons ears if there was nobody in the forest. So the answer to the riddle is both yes and no! 	all sound waves begin with vibrating matter	true
All sound waves begin with vibrating matter. Look at the first guitar string on the left in the Figure 1.1. Plucking the string makes it vibrate. The diagram below the figure shows the wave generated by the vibrating string. The moving string repeatedly pushes against the air particles next to it, which causes the air particles to vibrate. The vibrations spread through the air in all directions away from the guitar string as longitudinal waves. In longitudinal waves, particles of the medium vibrate back and forth parallel to the direction that the waves travel. Q: If there were no air particles to carry the vibrations away from the guitar string, how would sound reach the ear? A: It wouldnt unless the vibrations were carried by another medium. Sound waves are mechanical waves, so they can travel only though matter and not through empty space. 	vibrations spread through the air in all directions from a vibrating object	true
In science, sound is defined as the transfer of energy from a vibrating object in waves that travel through matter. Most people commonly use the term sound to mean what they hear when sound waves enter their ears. The tree above generated sound waves when it fell to the ground, so it made sound according to the scientific definition. But the sound wasnt detected by a persons ears if there was nobody in the forest. So the answer to the riddle is both yes and no! 	sound waves can travel only through gases	false
All sound waves begin with vibrating matter. Look at the first guitar string on the left in the Figure 1.1. Plucking the string makes it vibrate. The diagram below the figure shows the wave generated by the vibrating string. The moving string repeatedly pushes against the air particles next to it, which causes the air particles to vibrate. The vibrations spread through the air in all directions away from the guitar string as longitudinal waves. In longitudinal waves, particles of the medium vibrate back and forth parallel to the direction that the waves travel. Q: If there were no air particles to carry the vibrations away from the guitar string, how would sound reach the ear? A: It wouldnt unless the vibrations were carried by another medium. Sound waves are mechanical waves, so they can travel only though matter and not through empty space. 	sound waves are mechanical waves	true
Visible light includes all the wavelengths of light that the human eye can detect. It allows us to see objects in the world around us. Without visible light, we would only be able to sense most objects by sound, touch, or smell. Like humans, most other organisms also depend on visible light, either directly or indirectly. Many animalsincluding predators of jellyfishuse visible light to see. Plants and certain other organisms use visible light to make food in the process of photosynthesis. Without this food, most other organisms would not be able to survive. Q: Do you think that some animals might be able to see light that isnt visible to humans? A: Some animals can see light in the infrared or ultraviolet range of wavelengths. For example, mosquitoes can see infrared light, which is emitted by warm objects. By seeing infrared light, mosquitoes can tell where the warmest, blood-rich areas of the body are located. 	visible light includes all the wavelengths of light that the human eye can detect	true
Visible light includes all the wavelengths of light that the human eye can detect. It allows us to see objects in the world around us. Without visible light, we would only be able to sense most objects by sound, touch, or smell. Like humans, most other organisms also depend on visible light, either directly or indirectly. Many animalsincluding predators of jellyfishuse visible light to see. Plants and certain other organisms use visible light to make food in the process of photosynthesis. Without this food, most other organisms would not be able to survive. Q: Do you think that some animals might be able to see light that isnt visible to humans? A: Some animals can see light in the infrared or ultraviolet range of wavelengths. For example, mosquitoes can see infrared light, which is emitted by warm objects. By seeing infrared light, mosquitoes can tell where the warmest, blood-rich areas of the body are located. 	some animals can see infrared or ultraviolet light	true
How fast or slow something moves is its speed. Speed determines how far something travels in a given amount of time. The SI unit for speed is meters per second (m/s). Speed may be constant, but often it varies from moment to moment. 	speed determines how far something moves in a given amount of time	true
The speed of sound is the distance that sound waves travel in a given amount of time. Youll often see the speed of sound given as 343 meters per second. But thats just the speed of sound under a certain set of conditions, specifically, through dry air at 20  C. The speed of sound may be very different through other matter or at other temperatures. 	the speed of sound is faster than the speed of light	false
The speed of sound is the distance that sound waves travel in a given amount of time. Youll often see the speed of sound given as 343 meters per second. But thats just the speed of sound under a certain set of conditions, specifically, through dry air at 20  C. The speed of sound may be very different through other matter or at other temperatures. 	sound waves can travel only through matter	true
The speed of sound is the distance that sound waves travel in a given amount of time. Youll often see the speed of sound given as 343 meters per second. But thats just the speed of sound under a certain set of conditions, specifically, through dry air at 20  C. The speed of sound may be very different through other matter or at other temperatures. 	sound waves travel more quickly through dry air than moist air	false
Static electricity is a buildup of electric charges on objects. Charges build up when negative electrons are transferred from one object to another. The object that gives up electrons becomes positively charged, and the object that accepts the electrons becomes negatively charged. This can happen in several ways. One way electric charges can build up is through friction between materials that differ in their ability to give up or accept electrons. When you wipe your rubber-soled shoes on the wool mat, for example, electrons rub off the mat onto your shoes. As a result of this transfer of electrons, positive charges build up on the mat and negative charges build up on you. Once an object becomes electrically charged, it is likely to remain charged until it touches another object or at least comes very close to another object. Thats because electric charges cannot travel easily through air, especially if the air is dry. Q: Youre more likely to get a shock in the winter when the air is very dry. Can you explain why? A: When the air is very dry, electric charges are more likely to build up objects because they cannot travel easily through the dry air. This makes a shock more likely when you touch another object. 	electric charges can travel easily through dry air	false
What happens when you have become negatively charged and your hand approaches the metal doorknocker? Your negatively charged hand repels electrons in the metal, so the electrons move to the other side of the knocker. This makes the side of the knocker closest to your hand positively charged. As your negatively charged hand gets very close to the positively charged side of the metal, the air between your hand and the knocker also becomes electrically charged. This allows electrons to suddenly flow from your hand to the knocker. The sudden flow of electrons is static discharge. The discharge of electrons is the spark you see and the shock you feel. 	lightning is an example of static discharge	true
A surface wave is a combination of a transverse wave and a longitudinal wave. A transverse wave is a wave in which particles of the medium move up and down perpendicular to the direction of the wave. A longitudinal wave is a wave in which particles of the medium move parallel to the direction of the wave. In a surface wave, particles of the medium move up and down as well as back and forth. This gives them an overall circular motion. You can see how the particles move in the Figure 1.1. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	a surface wave is one type of mechanical wave	true
A surface wave is a wave that travels along the surface of a medium. The medium is the matter through which the wave travels. Ocean waves are the best-known examples of surface waves. They travel on the surface of the water between the ocean and the air. Q: What do you think causes ocean waves? A: Most ocean waves are caused by wind blowing across the water. Moving air molecules transfer some of their energy to molecules of ocean water. The energy travels across the surface of the water in waves. The stronger the winds are blowing, the larger the waves are and the more energy they have. 	an ocean wave is an example of a surface wave	true
A surface wave is a wave that travels along the surface of a medium. The medium is the matter through which the wave travels. Ocean waves are the best-known examples of surface waves. They travel on the surface of the water between the ocean and the air. Q: What do you think causes ocean waves? A: Most ocean waves are caused by wind blowing across the water. Moving air molecules transfer some of their energy to molecules of ocean water. The energy travels across the surface of the water in waves. The stronger the winds are blowing, the larger the waves are and the more energy they have. 	the larger a surface wave is the more energy the wave has	true
A surface wave is a wave that travels along the surface of a medium. The medium is the matter through which the wave travels. Ocean waves are the best-known examples of surface waves. They travel on the surface of the water between the ocean and the air. Q: What do you think causes ocean waves? A: Most ocean waves are caused by wind blowing across the water. Moving air molecules transfer some of their energy to molecules of ocean water. The energy travels across the surface of the water in waves. The stronger the winds are blowing, the larger the waves are and the more energy they have. 	an ocean wave carries water all the way across the ocean to the opposite shore	false
A synthesis reaction occurs when two or more reactants combine to form a single product. A synthesis reaction can be represented by the general equation: A+BC In this equation, the letters A and B represent the reactants that begin the reaction, and the letter C represents the product that is synthesized in the reaction. The arrow shows the direction in which the reaction occurs. Q: What is the chemical equation for the synthesis of nitrogen dioxide (NO2 ) from nitric oxide (NO) and oxygen (O2 )? A: The equation for this synthesis reaction is: 2NO + O2  2NO2 	the chemical equation 2no  o2  2no2 represents a synthesis reaction	true
A synthesis reaction occurs when two or more reactants combine to form a single product. A synthesis reaction can be represented by the general equation: A+BC In this equation, the letters A and B represent the reactants that begin the reaction, and the letter C represents the product that is synthesized in the reaction. The arrow shows the direction in which the reaction occurs. Q: What is the chemical equation for the synthesis of nitrogen dioxide (NO2 ) from nitric oxide (NO) and oxygen (O2 )? A: The equation for this synthesis reaction is: 2NO + O2  2NO2 	the product of a synthesis reaction can be an element or a compound	false
Important new technologies such as the wheel have had a big impact on human society. Major advances in technol- ogy have influenced every aspect of life, including transportation, food production, manufacturing, communication, medicine, and the arts. Thats because technology has the goal of solving human problems, so new technologies usually make life better. They may make work easier, for example, or make people healthier. Sometimes, however, new technologies affect people in negative ways. For example, using a new product or process might cause human health problems or pollute the environment. Q: Can you think of a modern technology that has both positive and negative effects on people? A: Modern methods of transportation have both positive and negative effects on people. They help people and goods move quickly all over the world. However, most of them pollute the environment. For example, gasoline-powered cars and trucks add many pollutants to the atmosphere. The pollutants harm peoples health and contribute to global climate change. 	technology can have both positive and negative effects on people	true
Conduction is the transfer of thermal energy between particles of matter that are touching. Thermal conduction occurs when particles of warmer matter bump into particles of cooler matter and transfer some of their thermal energy to the cooler particles. Conduction is usually faster in certain solids and liquids than in gases. Materials that are good conductors of thermal energy are called thermal conductors. Metals are especially good thermal conductors because they have freely moving electrons that can transfer thermal energy quickly and easily. Besides the heating element inside a toaster, another example of a thermal conductor is a metal radiator, like the one in the Figure 1.1. When hot water flows through the coils of the radiator, the metal quickly heats up by conduction and then radiates thermal energy into the surrounding air. Q: Thermal conductors have many uses, but sometimes its important to prevent the transfer of thermal energy. Can you think of an example? A: One example is staying warm on a cold day. You will stay warmer if you can prevent the transfer of your own thermal energy to the outside air. 	thermal conduction occurs more quickly in certain solids and liquids than in gases	true
Conduction is the transfer of thermal energy between particles of matter that are touching. Thermal conduction occurs when particles of warmer matter bump into particles of cooler matter and transfer some of their thermal energy to the cooler particles. Conduction is usually faster in certain solids and liquids than in gases. Materials that are good conductors of thermal energy are called thermal conductors. Metals are especially good thermal conductors because they have freely moving electrons that can transfer thermal energy quickly and easily. Besides the heating element inside a toaster, another example of a thermal conductor is a metal radiator, like the one in the Figure 1.1. When hot water flows through the coils of the radiator, the metal quickly heats up by conduction and then radiates thermal energy into the surrounding air. Q: Thermal conductors have many uses, but sometimes its important to prevent the transfer of thermal energy. Can you think of an example? A: One example is staying warm on a cold day. You will stay warmer if you can prevent the transfer of your own thermal energy to the outside air. 	when you wear a down jacket it prevents the transfer of cold from the outside air to your body	false
Why do the air and sand of Death Valley feel so hot? Its because their particles are moving very rapidly. Anything that is moving has kinetic energy, and the faster it is moving, the more kinetic energy it has. The total kinetic energy of moving particles of matter is called thermal energy. Its not just hot things such as the air and sand of Death Valley that have thermal energy. All matter has thermal energy, even matter that feels cold. Thats because the particles of all matter are in constant motion and have kinetic energy. 	only matter that feels warm has thermal energy	false
Why do the air and sand of Death Valley feel so hot? Its because their particles are moving very rapidly. Anything that is moving has kinetic energy, and the faster it is moving, the more kinetic energy it has. The total kinetic energy of moving particles of matter is called thermal energy. Its not just hot things such as the air and sand of Death Valley that have thermal energy. All matter has thermal energy, even matter that feels cold. Thats because the particles of all matter are in constant motion and have kinetic energy. 	an object with a lower temperature always has less thermal energy than an object with a warmer temperature	false
Why do the air and sand of Death Valley feel so hot? Its because their particles are moving very rapidly. Anything that is moving has kinetic energy, and the faster it is moving, the more kinetic energy it has. The total kinetic energy of moving particles of matter is called thermal energy. Its not just hot things such as the air and sand of Death Valley that have thermal energy. All matter has thermal energy, even matter that feels cold. Thats because the particles of all matter are in constant motion and have kinetic energy. 	the faster the particles of matter are moving the greater their kinetic energy is	true
Why do the air and sand of Death Valley feel so hot? Its because their particles are moving very rapidly. Anything that is moving has kinetic energy, and the faster it is moving, the more kinetic energy it has. The total kinetic energy of moving particles of matter is called thermal energy. Its not just hot things such as the air and sand of Death Valley that have thermal energy. All matter has thermal energy, even matter that feels cold. Thats because the particles of all matter are in constant motion and have kinetic energy. 	the slower the particles of matter are moving the lower their temperature is	true
The bonfire from the opening image has a lot of thermal energy. Thermal energy is the total kinetic energy of moving particles of matter, and the transfer of thermal energy is called heat. Thermal energy from the bonfire is transferred to the hands by thermal radiation. Thermal radiation is the transfer of thermal energy by waves that can travel through air or even through empty space, as shown in the Figure 1.1. When the waves of thermal energy reach objects, they transfer the energy to the objects, causing them to warm up. This is how the fire warms the hands of someone sitting near the bonfire. This is also how the suns energy reaches Earth and heats its surface. Without the energy radiated from the sun, Earth would be too cold to support life as we know it. Thermal radiation is one of three ways that thermal energy can be transferred. The other two ways are conduction and convection, both of which need matter to transfer energy. Radiation is the only way of transferring thermal energy that doesnt require matter. 	thermal energy is the total kinetic energy of moving particles of matter	true
You might be surprised to learn that everything radiates thermal energy, not just really hot things such as the sun or a fire. For example, when its cold outside, a heated home radiates some of its thermal energy into the outdoor environment. A home that is poorly insulated radiates more energy than a home that is well insulated. Special cameras can be used to detect radiated heat. In the Figure 1.2, you can see an image created by one of these cameras. The areas that are yellow are the areas where the greatest amount of thermal energy is radiating from the home. Even people radiate thermal energy. In fact, when a room is full of people, it may feel noticeably warmer because of all the thermal energy the people radiate! Q: Where is thermal radiation radiating from the home in the picture? A: The greatest amount of thermal energy is radiating from the window on the upper left. A lot of thermal energy is also radiating from the edges of the windows and door. 	only very hot objects radiate thermal energy	false
The bonfire from the opening image has a lot of thermal energy. Thermal energy is the total kinetic energy of moving particles of matter, and the transfer of thermal energy is called heat. Thermal energy from the bonfire is transferred to the hands by thermal radiation. Thermal radiation is the transfer of thermal energy by waves that can travel through air or even through empty space, as shown in the Figure 1.1. When the waves of thermal energy reach objects, they transfer the energy to the objects, causing them to warm up. This is how the fire warms the hands of someone sitting near the bonfire. This is also how the suns energy reaches Earth and heats its surface. Without the energy radiated from the sun, Earth would be too cold to support life as we know it. Thermal radiation is one of three ways that thermal energy can be transferred. The other two ways are conduction and convection, both of which need matter to transfer energy. Radiation is the only way of transferring thermal energy that doesnt require matter. 	life on earth depends on thermal energy radiated from the sun	true
John Dalton discovered atoms in 1804. He thought they were the smallest particles of matter, which could not be broken down into smaller particles. He envisioned them as solid, hard spheres. It wasnt until 1897 that a scientist named Joseph John (J. J.) Thomson discovered that there are smaller particles within the atom. Thomson was born in England and studied at Cambridge University, where he later became a professor. In 1906, he won the Nobel Prize in physics for his research on how gases conduct electricity. This research also led to his discovery of the electron. You can see a picture of Thomson 1.1. 	thomson won a nobel prize for his discovery of protons	false
John Dalton discovered atoms in 1804. He thought they were the smallest particles of matter, which could not be broken down into smaller particles. He envisioned them as solid, hard spheres. It wasnt until 1897 that a scientist named Joseph John (J. J.) Thomson discovered that there are smaller particles within the atom. Thomson was born in England and studied at Cambridge University, where he later became a professor. In 1906, he won the Nobel Prize in physics for his research on how gases conduct electricity. This research also led to his discovery of the electron. You can see a picture of Thomson 1.1. 	thomsons research proved daltons earlier claim about the smallest particles of matter	false
The girl pictured above became negatively charged because electrons flowed from the van de Graaff generator to her. Whenever electrons are transferred between objects, neutral matter becomes charged. This occurs even with individual atoms. Atoms are neutral in electric charge because they have the same number of negative electrons as positive protons. However, if atoms lose or gain electrons, they become charged particles called ions. You can see how this happens in the Figure 1.1. When an atom loses electrons, it becomes a positively charged ion, or cation. When an atom gains electrons, it becomes a negative charged ion, or anion. 	all atoms are neutral in electric charge	true
Like the formation of ions, the formation of charged matter in general depends on the transfer of electrons, either between two materials or within a material. Three ways this can occur are referred to as conduction, polarization, and friction. All three ways are described below. However, regardless of how electrons are transferred, the total charge always remains the same. Electrons move, but they arent destroyed. This is the law of conservation of charge. 	the formation of charged matter always depends on the transfer of electrons	true
Assume that you have walked across a wool carpet in rubber-soled shoes and become negatively charged. If you then reach out to touch a metal doorknob, electrons in the neutral metal will be repelled and move away from your hand before you even touch the knob. In this way, one end of the doorknob becomes positively charged and the other end becomes negatively charged. This is called polarization. Polarization occurs whenever electrons within a neutral object move because of the electric field of a nearby charged object. It occurs without direct contact between the two objects. The Figure 1.2 models how polarization occurs. Q: What happens when the negatively charged plastic rod in the diagram is placed close to the neutral metal plate? A: Electrons in the plate are repelled by the positive charges in the rod. The electrons move away from the rod, causing one side of the plate to become positively charged and the other side to become negatively charged. 	polarization occurs only when there is direct contact between two objects	false
Did you ever rub an inflated balloon against your hair? You can see what happens in the Figure 1.3. Friction between the balloon and hair cause electrons from the hair to rub off on the balloon. Thats because a balloon attracts electrons more strongly than hair does. After the transfer of electrons, the balloon becomes negatively charged and the hair becomes positively charged. The individual hairs push away from each other and stand on end because like charges repel each other. The balloon and the hair attract each other because opposite charges attract. Electrons are transferred in this way whenever there is friction between materials that differ in their ability to give up or accept electrons. Q: If you rub a balloon against a wall, it may stick to the wall. Explain why. 	electrons are transferred whenever there is friction between materials that differ in their ability to give up or accept electrons	true
Transition metals include the elements that are most often placed below the periodic table (the pink- and purple- shaded elements in the Figure 1.1). Those that follow lanthanum (La) are called lanthanides. They are all relatively reactive for transition metals. Those that follow actinium (Ac) are called actinides. They are all radioactive. This means that they are unstable, so they decay into different, more stable elements. Many of the actinides do not occur in nature but are made in laboratories. 	transition metals are high in density and very hard	true
Transition metals include the elements that are most often placed below the periodic table (the pink- and purple- shaded elements in the Figure 1.1). Those that follow lanthanum (La) are called lanthanides. They are all relatively reactive for transition metals. Those that follow actinium (Ac) are called actinides. They are all radioactive. This means that they are unstable, so they decay into different, more stable elements. Many of the actinides do not occur in nature but are made in laboratories. 	most transition metals are dull and brown in color	false
A transverse wave is characterized by the high and low points reached by particles of the medium as the wave passes through. The high points are called crests, and the low points are called troughs. You can see both in the Figure below. 	a mechanical wave is a wave that travels through matter	true
A transverse wave is characterized by the high and low points reached by particles of the medium as the wave passes through. The high points are called crests, and the low points are called troughs. You can see both in the Figure below. 	the matter a mechanical wave travels through is called the medium	true
Transverse waves called S waves occur during earthquakes. The disturbance that causes an earthquake sends transverse waves through underground rocks in all directions away from the disturbance. S waves may travel for hundreds of miles. An S wave is modeled in the Figure 1.3. 	earthquake waves travel in all directions away from the disturbance that causes the earthquake	true
Transverse waves called S waves occur during earthquakes. The disturbance that causes an earthquake sends transverse waves through underground rocks in all directions away from the disturbance. S waves may travel for hundreds of miles. An S wave is modeled in the Figure 1.3. 	s waves travel through underground rocks	true
Static friction acts on objects when they are resting on a surface. For example, if you are hiking in the woods, there is static friction between your shoes and the trail each time you put down your foot (see Figure 1.1). Without this static friction, your feet would slip out from under you, making it difficult to walk. In fact, thats exactly what happens if you try to walk on ice. Thats because ice is very slippery and offers very little friction. Q: Can you think of other examples of static friction? A: One example is the friction that helps the people climb the rock wall in the opening picture above. Static friction keeps their hands and feet from slipping. 	static friction prevents you from slipping when you walk on a sidewalk	true
Friction is the force that opposes motion between any surfaces that are in contact. There are four types of friction: static, sliding, rolling, and fluid friction. Static, sliding, and rolling friction occur between solid surfaces. Fluid friction occurs in liquids and gases. All four types of friction are described below. 	sliding friction is stronger than static friction	false
Animals such as bats and dolphins send out ultrasound waves and use their echoes, or reflected waves, to identify the locations of objects they cannot see. This is called echolocation. Animals use echolocation to find prey and avoid running into objects in the dark. You can see in the Figure 1.1 how a bat uses echolocation to find insect prey. 	some animals use echolocation to find prey	true
Another use of ultrasound is to see inside the human body. This use of ultrasound is called ultrasonography. Harmless ultrasound waves are sent inside the body, and the reflected waves are used to create an image on a screen. This technology is used to examine internal organs and unborn babies without risk to the patient. You can see a doctor using ultrasound in the Figure 1.3. 	the use of reflected ultrasound waves to create images of organs inside the body is called ultrasonography	true
Unsaturated hydrocarbons called aromatic hydrocarbons are cyclic hydrocarbons that have double bonds. These compounds have six carbon atoms in a ring with alternating single and double bonds. The smallest aromatic hydrocarbon is benzene, which has just one ring. Its structural formula is shown in the Figure 1.2. Larger aromatic hydrocarbons consist of two or more rings, which are joined together by bonds between their carbon atoms. The name of aromatic hydrocarbons comes from their strong aroma, or scent. Thats why they are used in air fresheners and mothballs. A: Each carbon atom forms four covalent bonds. Carbon atoms always form four covalent bonds, regardless of the atoms to which it bonds. 	the smallest alkene is methene	false
Unsaturated hydrocarbons that contain one or more double bonds are called alkenes. The name of a specific alkene always ends in -ene and has a prefix indicating the number of carbon atoms. The structural formula in the Figure Ethene is produced by most fruits and vegetables. It speeds up ripening. The Figure 1.1 show the effects of ethene on bananas. Alkenes can have different shapes. They can form straight chains, branched chains, or rings. Alkenes with the same atoms but different shapes are called isomers. Smaller alkenes have relatively high boiling and melting points, so they are gases at room temperature. Larger alkenes have lower boiling and melting points, so they are liquids or waxy solids at room temperature. The bananas on the left were stored in a special bag that absorbs ethene. The bananas on the right were stored without a bag. 	smaller alkenes are gases at room temperature	true
Unsaturated hydrocarbons that contain one or more triple bonds are called alkynes. The names of specific alkynes always end in -yne and have a prefix for the number of carbon atoms. The structural formula in the Figure 1.3 represents the smallest alkyne, named ethyne, which has two carbon atoms and two hydrogen atoms (C2 H2 ). Ethyne is also called acetylene. It is burned in acetylene torches, like the one pictured in the Figure 1.4. The flame of an acetylene torch is so hot that it can melt metal. Cutting metal with an acetylene (ethyne) torch. Alkynes may form straight or branched chains. They rarely occur in ring shapes. In fact, alkynes of all shapes are relatively rare in nature. 	alkynes are very common in nature	false
Like a bar magnet, planet Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field over which it exerts magnetic force. Earths magnetic field is called the magnetosphere. You can see it in the Figure 1.1. 	earth has north and south magnetic poles like a bar magnet	true
Like a bar magnet, planet Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field over which it exerts magnetic force. Earths magnetic field is called the magnetosphere. You can see it in the Figure 1.1. 	there would be no northern lights without the magnetosphere	true
Like a bar magnet, planet Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field over which it exerts magnetic force. Earths magnetic field is called the magnetosphere. You can see it in the Figure 1.1. 	people have only recently started using earths magnetic field for determining direction	false
Like a bar magnet, planet Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field over which it exerts magnetic force. Earths magnetic field is called the magnetosphere. You can see it in the Figure 1.1. 	some birds may be able to sense earths magnetic field lines as a visual pattern	true
Valence electrons are the electrons in the outer energy level of an atom that can participate in interactions with other atoms. Valence electrons are generally the electrons that are farthest from the nucleus. As a result, they may be attracted as much or more by the nucleus of another atom than they are by their own nucleus. 	valence electrons tend to be attracted by the nuclei of other atoms as much as or more than the nucleus of their own atom	true
Valence electrons are the electrons in the outer energy level of an atom that can participate in interactions with other atoms. Valence electrons are generally the electrons that are farthest from the nucleus. As a result, they may be attracted as much or more by the nucleus of another atom than they are by their own nucleus. 	all the elements in the same period of the periodic table have the same number of valence electrons	false
Speed tells you only how fast or slow an object is moving. It doesnt tell you the direction the object is moving. The measure of both speed and direction is called velocity. Velocity is a vector. A vector is measurement that includes both size and direction. Vectors are often represented by arrows. When using an arrow to represent velocity, the length of the arrow stands for speed, and the way the arrow points indicates the direction. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	velocity is a vector	true
You can calculate the average velocity of a moving object that is not changing direction by dividing the distance the object travels by the time it takes to travel that distance. You would use this formula: velocity = distance time This is the same formula that is used for calculating average speed. It represents velocity only if the answer also includes the direction that the object is traveling. Lets work through a sample problem. Tonis dog is racing down the sidewalk toward the east. The dog travels 36 meters in 18 seconds before it stops running. The velocity of the dog is: distance time 36 m = 18 s = 2 m/s east velocity = Note that the answer is given in the SI unit for velocity, which is m/s, and it includes the direction that the dog is traveling. Q: What would the dogs velocity be if it ran the same distance in the opposite direction but covered the distance in 24 seconds? A: In this case, the velocity would be: distance time 36 m = 24 s = 1.5 m/s west velocity = 	the si unit for velocity is kmh	false
In a velocity-time graph, acceleration is represented by the slope, or steepness, of the graph line. If the line slopes upward, like the line between 0 and 4 seconds in the Figure 1.1, velocity is increasing, so acceleration is positive. If the line is horizontal, as it is between 4 and 7 seconds, velocity is constant and acceleration is zero. If the line slopes downward, like the line between 7 and 10 seconds, velocity is decreasing and acceleration is negative. Negative acceleration is called deceleration. Q: Assume that another sprinter is running the same race. The other runner reaches a top velocity of 9 m/s by 4 seconds after the start of the race. How would the first 4 seconds of the velocity-time graph for this runner be different from the Figure 1.1? A: The graph line for this runner during seconds 0-4 would be steeper (have a greater slope). This would show that acceleration is greater during this time period for the other sprinter. 	the steepness of a line graph is called its slope	true
In a velocity-time graph, acceleration is represented by the slope, or steepness, of the graph line. If the line slopes upward, like the line between 0 and 4 seconds in the Figure 1.1, velocity is increasing, so acceleration is positive. If the line is horizontal, as it is between 4 and 7 seconds, velocity is constant and acceleration is zero. If the line slopes downward, like the line between 7 and 10 seconds, velocity is decreasing and acceleration is negative. Negative acceleration is called deceleration. Q: Assume that another sprinter is running the same race. The other runner reaches a top velocity of 9 m/s by 4 seconds after the start of the race. How would the first 4 seconds of the velocity-time graph for this runner be different from the Figure 1.1? A: The graph line for this runner during seconds 0-4 would be steeper (have a greater slope). This would show that acceleration is greater during this time period for the other sprinter. 	in the graph in question 8 acceleration between seconds 2 and 4 is 10 ms	false
Reflection of light occurs when light bounces back from a surface that it cannot pass through. Reflection may be regular or diffuse. If the surface is very smooth, like a mirror, the reflected light forms a very clear image. This is called regular, or specular, reflection. In the Figure 1.1, the smooth surface of the still water in the pond on the left reflects light in this way. When light is reflected from a rough surface, the waves of light are reflected in many different directions, so a clear image does not form. This is called diffuse reflection. In the Figure 1.1, the ripples in the water in the picture on the right cause diffuse reflection of the blooming trees. 	a clear image is produced by diffuse reflection	false
Reflection of light occurs when light bounces back from a surface that it cannot pass through. Reflection may be regular or diffuse. If the surface is very smooth, like a mirror, the reflected light forms a very clear image. This is called regular, or specular, reflection. In the Figure 1.1, the smooth surface of the still water in the pond on the left reflects light in this way. When light is reflected from a rough surface, the waves of light are reflected in many different directions, so a clear image does not form. This is called diffuse reflection. In the Figure 1.1, the ripples in the water in the picture on the right cause diffuse reflection of the blooming trees. 	regular reflection occurs when the reflective surface is very smooth	true
Light may transfer its energy to matter rather than being reflected or transmitted by matter. This is called absorption. When light is absorbed, the added energy increases the temperature of matter. If you get into a car that has been sitting in the sun all day, the seats and other parts of the cars interior may be almost too hot to touch, especially if they are black or very dark in color. Thats because dark colors absorb most of the sunlight that strikes them. Q: In hot sunny climates, people often dress in light-colored clothes. Why is this a good idea? A: Light-colored clothes absorb less light and reflect more light than dark-colored clothes, so they keep people cooler. 	when light is absorbed it transfers its energy to matter	true
The human eye is an organ that is specialized to collect light and focus images. The structures of the human eye are shown in the Figure 1.1. Examine each structure in the diagram as you read about it below. The sclera, also known as the white of the eye, is an opaque outer covering that protects the eye. It keeps light out of the eye except at the center front of the eye. The cornea is a transparent outer covering of the front of the eye. It protects the eye and also acts as a convex lens. A convex lens is thicker in the middle than at the edges and makes rays of light converge, or meet at a point. The shape of the cornea helps focus light that enters the eye. The pupil is an opening in the front of the eye. It looks black because it doesnt reflect any light. All the light passes through it instead. The pupil controls the amount of light that enters the eye. It automatically gets bigger or smaller to let more or less light in as needed. The iris is the colored part of the eye. It controls the size of the pupil. The lens of the eye is a convex lens. It fine-tunes the focus so an image forms on the retina at the back of the eye. Tiny muscles control the shape of the lens to focus images of close or distant objects. The retina is a membrane lining the back of the eye. The retina has nerve cells called rods and cones that change images to electrical signals. Rods are good at sensing dim light but cant distinguish different colors of light. Cones can sense colors but not dim light. There are three different types of cones. Each type senses one of the three primary colors of light (red, green, or blue). The optic nerve carries electrical signals from the rods and cones to the brain. Q: The lens of the eye is a convex lens. How would vision be affected if the lens of the eye was concave instead of convex? A: A concave lens causes rays of light to diverge, or spread apart. It forms a virtual image on the same side of the lens at the object being viewed. Therefore, a concave lens would focus the image in front of the eye, not on the retina inside the eye. No signals would be sent to the brain so vision would not be possible. 	the sclera is the opaque white outer covering of the eye	true
The ability to see is called vision. This ability depends on more than healthy eyes. It also depends on certain parts of the brain, because the brain and eyes work together to allow us to see. The eyes collect and focus visible light. The lens and other structures of the eye work together to focus an image on the retina. The image is upside-down and reduced in size, as you can see in the Figure 1.2. Cells in the retina change the image to electrical signals that travel to the brain through the optic nerve. The brain interprets the electrical signals as shape, color, and brightness. It also interprets the image as though it were right-side up. The brain does this automatically, so what we see always appears right-side up. The brain also interprets what we are seeing. Q: The part of the brain that processes information from the eyes is the visual cortex. It is located at the back of the brain. How might an injury to the visual cortex affect vision? A: An injury to the visual cortex might cause abnormal vision or even blindness regardless of how well the eyes can gather and focus light. 	the lens is the only structure in the eye that focuses light	false
The human eye is an organ that is specialized to collect light and focus images. The structures of the human eye are shown in the Figure 1.1. Examine each structure in the diagram as you read about it below. The sclera, also known as the white of the eye, is an opaque outer covering that protects the eye. It keeps light out of the eye except at the center front of the eye. The cornea is a transparent outer covering of the front of the eye. It protects the eye and also acts as a convex lens. A convex lens is thicker in the middle than at the edges and makes rays of light converge, or meet at a point. The shape of the cornea helps focus light that enters the eye. The pupil is an opening in the front of the eye. It looks black because it doesnt reflect any light. All the light passes through it instead. The pupil controls the amount of light that enters the eye. It automatically gets bigger or smaller to let more or less light in as needed. The iris is the colored part of the eye. It controls the size of the pupil. The lens of the eye is a convex lens. It fine-tunes the focus so an image forms on the retina at the back of the eye. Tiny muscles control the shape of the lens to focus images of close or distant objects. The retina is a membrane lining the back of the eye. The retina has nerve cells called rods and cones that change images to electrical signals. Rods are good at sensing dim light but cant distinguish different colors of light. Cones can sense colors but not dim light. There are three different types of cones. Each type senses one of the three primary colors of light (red, green, or blue). The optic nerve carries electrical signals from the rods and cones to the brain. Q: The lens of the eye is a convex lens. How would vision be affected if the lens of the eye was concave instead of convex? A: A concave lens causes rays of light to diverge, or spread apart. It forms a virtual image on the same side of the lens at the object being viewed. Therefore, a concave lens would focus the image in front of the eye, not on the retina inside the eye. No signals would be sent to the brain so vision would not be possible. 	rods are nerve cells that sense different colors of light	false
Many people have problems with their vision, or ability to see. Often, the problem is due to the shape of the eyes and how they focus light. Two of the most common vision problems are nearsightedness and farsightedness, which you can read about below. You may even have one of these vision problems yourself. Usually, the problems can be corrected with contact lenses or lenses in eyeglasses. In many people, they can also be corrected with laser surgery, which reshapes the outer layer of the eye. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the vision problem called myopia is also called farsightedness	false
Many people have problems with their vision, or ability to see. Often, the problem is due to the shape of the eyes and how they focus light. Two of the most common vision problems are nearsightedness and farsightedness, which you can read about below. You may even have one of these vision problems yourself. Usually, the problems can be corrected with contact lenses or lenses in eyeglasses. In many people, they can also be corrected with laser surgery, which reshapes the outer layer of the eye. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the vision problem called hyperopia is also called nearsightedness	false
Waves that travel through mattersuch as the fabric of a flagare called mechanical waves. The matter they travel through is called the medium. When the energy of a wave passes through the medium, particles of the medium move. The more energy the wave has, the farther the particles of the medium move. The distance the particles move is measured by the waves amplitude. 	the matter a wave travels through is called the material of the wave	false
Waves that travel through mattersuch as the fabric of a flagare called mechanical waves. The matter they travel through is called the medium. When the energy of a wave passes through the medium, particles of the medium move. The more energy the wave has, the farther the particles of the medium move. The distance the particles move is measured by the waves amplitude. 	the more energy a wave has the farther the particles of matter move	true
A wave caused by a disturbance with more energy has greater amplitude. Imagine dropping a small pebble into a pond of still water. Tiny ripples will move out from the disturbance in concentric circles. The ripples are low- amplitude waves with very little energy. Now imagine throwing a big boulder into the pond. Very large waves will be generated by the disturbance. These waves are high-amplitude waves and have a great deal of energy. 	a wave with greater energy has a larger amplitude	true
Waves that travel through mattersuch as the fabric of a flagare called mechanical waves. The matter they travel through is called the medium. When the energy of a wave passes through the medium, particles of the medium move. The more energy the wave has, the farther the particles of the medium move. The distance the particles move is measured by the waves amplitude. 	in all mechanical waves particles of the medium move up and down when the wave passes through them	false
The number of waves that pass a fixed point in a given amount of time is wave frequency. Wave frequency can be measured by counting the number of crests (high points) of waves that pass the fixed point in 1 second or some other time period. The higher the number is, the greater the frequency of the waves. The SI unit for wave frequency is the hertz (Hz), where 1 hertz equals 1 wave passing a fixed point in 1 second. The Figure 1.1 shows high-frequency and low-frequency transverse waves. Q: The wavelength of a wave is the distance between corresponding points on adjacent waves. For example, it is the distance between two adjacent crests in the transverse waves in the diagram. Infer how wave frequency is related to wavelength. 	a wave with a higher frequency has a longer wavelength	false
The frequency of a wave is the same as the frequency of the vibrations that caused the wave. For example, to generate a higher-frequency wave in a rope, you must move the rope up and down more quickly. This takes more energy, so a higher-frequency wave has more energy than a lower-frequency wave with the same amplitude. You can see examples of different frequencies in the Figure 1.2 (Amplitude is the distance that particles of the medium move when the energy of a wave passes through them.) 	the frequency of a wave is the same as the frequency of vibrations that caused the wave	true
The frequency of a wave is the same as the frequency of the vibrations that caused the wave. For example, to generate a higher-frequency wave in a rope, you must move the rope up and down more quickly. This takes more energy, so a higher-frequency wave has more energy than a lower-frequency wave with the same amplitude. You can see examples of different frequencies in the Figure 1.2 (Amplitude is the distance that particles of the medium move when the energy of a wave passes through them.) 	for waves of the same amplitude a higher frequency wave has less energy than a shorter frequency wave	false
Atoms are the building blocks of matter. Unlike blocks that we know, these building blocks are incredibly small. In fact, they are the smallest particles of an element. Atoms still have the same properties as the elements they make up. For example, an atom of gold has the same melting point as a gold coin. If we could see it, it would have the same color. Elements are also pure substances. This means they are not mixed with anything else. Pure substances such as nickel, hydrogen, and helium make up all kinds of matter. All the atoms of a given element are identical. Atoms of different elements are not physically the same. Think of something you might have made from LEGOs. You built some shape using the many different sized and shaped blocks. This is much like how atoms combine to become everything we know. If we took only one size and shape of block and put them together, we would make a pure substance. It would be an element. If you take apart anything that you have built, those individual parts are like the atoms. With those small parts, you build bigger things. Sometimes they are all the same type of block. Other times, they may be different kinds of blocks. We use these combinations of different blocks to make more complicated things. 	only sound waves can be reflected	false
Atoms are the building blocks of matter. Unlike blocks that we know, these building blocks are incredibly small. In fact, they are the smallest particles of an element. Atoms still have the same properties as the elements they make up. For example, an atom of gold has the same melting point as a gold coin. If we could see it, it would have the same color. Elements are also pure substances. This means they are not mixed with anything else. Pure substances such as nickel, hydrogen, and helium make up all kinds of matter. All the atoms of a given element are identical. Atoms of different elements are not physically the same. Think of something you might have made from LEGOs. You built some shape using the many different sized and shaped blocks. This is much like how atoms combine to become everything we know. If we took only one size and shape of block and put them together, we would make a pure substance. It would be an element. If you take apart anything that you have built, those individual parts are like the atoms. With those small parts, you build bigger things. Sometimes they are all the same type of block. Other times, they may be different kinds of blocks. We use these combinations of different blocks to make more complicated things. 	refraction occurs because waves change speed in a new medium	true
Constructive interference occurs when the crests, or highest points, of one wave overlap the crests of the other wave. You can see this in the Figure 1.1. As the waves pass through each other, the crests combine to produce a wave with greater amplitude. 	constructive interference occurs when the crests of one wave overlap the troughs of the other wave	false
Destructive interference occurs when the crests of one wave overlap the troughs, or lowest points, of another wave. The Figure 1.2 shows what happens. As the waves pass through each other, the crests and troughs cancel each other out to produce a wave with zero amplitude. 	destructive interference occurs when the crests of two waves overlap	false
Waves may reflect off an obstacle that they are unable to pass through. When waves are reflected straight back from an obstacle, the reflected waves interfere with the original waves and create standing waves. These are waves that appear to be standing still. Standing waves occur because of a combination of constructive and destructive interference. Q: How could you use a rope to produce standing waves? A: You could tie one end of the rope to a fixed object, such as doorknob, and move the other end up and down to generate waves in the rope. When the waves reach the fixed object, they are reflected back. The original waves and the reflected waves interfere to produce a standing wave. Try it yourself and see if the waves appear to stand still. 	standing waves form only when waves reflect at a 90degree angle	true
A photon isnt a fixed amount of energy. Instead, the amount of energy in a photon depends on the frequency of the electromagnetic wave. The frequency of a wave is the number of waves that pass a fixed point in a given amount of time, such as the number of waves per second. In waves with higher frequencies, photons have more energy. 	before einstein all scientists thought that electromagnetic energy consists of waves	false
In 1905, the physicist Albert Einstein developed a new theory about electromagnetic radiation. The theory is often called the wave-particle theory. It explains how electromagnetic radiation can behave as both a wave and a particle. Einstein argued that when an electron returns to a lower energy level and gives off electromagnetic energy, the energy is released as a discrete packet of energy. We now call such a packet of energy a photon. According to Einstein, a photon resembles a particle but moves like a wave. You can see this in the Figure 1.1. The theory posits that waves of photons traveling through space or matter make up electromagnetic radiation. 	einstein based his waveparticle theory on experimental evidence	false
A photon isnt a fixed amount of energy. Instead, the amount of energy in a photon depends on the frequency of the electromagnetic wave. The frequency of a wave is the number of waves that pass a fixed point in a given amount of time, such as the number of waves per second. In waves with higher frequencies, photons have more energy. 	photons create interference patterns just as waves do	true
The speed of most waves depends on the medium, or the matter through which the waves are traveling. Generally, waves travel fastest through solids and slowest through gases. Thats because particles are closest together in solids and farthest apart in gases. When particles are farther apart, it takes longer for the energy of the disturbance to pass from particle to particle through the medium. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	the speed of most waves depends on the medium	true
The speed of most waves depends on the medium, or the matter through which the waves are traveling. Generally, waves travel fastest through solids and slowest through gases. Thats because particles are closest together in solids and farthest apart in gases. When particles are farther apart, it takes longer for the energy of the disturbance to pass from particle to particle through the medium. Click image to the left or use the URL below. URL: 	waves generally travel fastest through gases and slowest through solids	false
The wavelength of a wave is related to the waves energy. Short-wavelength waves have more energy than long- wavelength waves of the same amplitude. (Amplitude is a measure of how far particles of the medium move up and down or back and forth when a wave passes through them.) You can see examples of transverse waves with shorter and longer wavelengths in the Figure 1.3. A: Violet light has the greatest energy because it has the shortest wavelength. 	the wavelength of visible light determines its color	true
Wavelength is one way of measuring the size of waves. It is the distance between two corresponding points on adjacent waves, and it is usually measured in meters. How it is measured is a little different for transverse and longitudinal waves. In a transverse wave, particles of the medium vibrate up and down at right angles to the direction that the wave travels. The wavelength of a transverse wave can be measured as the distance between two adjacent crests, or high points, as shown in the Figure 1.1. In a longitudinal wave, particles of matter vibrate back and forth in the same direction that the wave travels. The wavelength of a longitudinal wave can be measured as the distance between two adjacent compressions, as shown in the Figure 1.2. Compressions are the places where particles of the medium crowd close together as the energy of the wave passes through. 	wavelength usually is measured in meters	true
The wavelength of a wave is related to the waves energy. Short-wavelength waves have more energy than long- wavelength waves of the same amplitude. (Amplitude is a measure of how far particles of the medium move up and down or back and forth when a wave passes through them.) You can see examples of transverse waves with shorter and longer wavelengths in the Figure 1.3. A: Violet light has the greatest energy because it has the shortest wavelength. 	for waves of the same amplitude shorter wavelength waves have less energy than longer wavelength waves	false
The mechanical advantage of a simple machine is the factor by which it multiplies the force applied to the machine. It is the ratio of the output force to the input force. A wedge applies more force to the object (output force) than the user applies to the wedge (input force), so the mechanical advantage of a wedge is greater than 1. A longer, thinner wedge has a greater mechanical advantage than a shorter, wider wedge. With all wedges, the trade-off is that the output force is applied over a shorter distance, so force may need to be applied to the wedge repeatedly to push it through the object. Q: Which wedge in the Figure 1.3 do you think would do the same amount of work with less input force? A: The wedge on the left has a greater mechanical advantage, so it would do the same amount of work with less input force. 	a wedge is a type of compound machine	false
The mechanical advantage of a simple machine is the factor by which it multiplies the force applied to the machine. It is the ratio of the output force to the input force. A wedge applies more force to the object (output force) than the user applies to the wedge (input force), so the mechanical advantage of a wedge is greater than 1. A longer, thinner wedge has a greater mechanical advantage than a shorter, wider wedge. With all wedges, the trade-off is that the output force is applied over a shorter distance, so force may need to be applied to the wedge repeatedly to push it through the object. Q: Which wedge in the Figure 1.3 do you think would do the same amount of work with less input force? A: The wedge on the left has a greater mechanical advantage, so it would do the same amount of work with less input force. 	the ratio of output force to input force for a wedge is always less than 1	false
The mechanical advantage of a simple machine is the factor by which it multiplies the force applied to the machine. It is the ratio of the output force to the input force. A wedge applies more force to the object (output force) than the user applies to the wedge (input force), so the mechanical advantage of a wedge is greater than 1. A longer, thinner wedge has a greater mechanical advantage than a shorter, wider wedge. With all wedges, the trade-off is that the output force is applied over a shorter distance, so force may need to be applied to the wedge repeatedly to push it through the object. Q: Which wedge in the Figure 1.3 do you think would do the same amount of work with less input force? A: The wedge on the left has a greater mechanical advantage, so it would do the same amount of work with less input force. 	a longer thinner wedge has a greater mechanical advantage than a shorter thicker wedge	true
The mechanical advantage of a simple machine is the factor by which it multiplies the force applied to the machine. It is the ratio of the output force to the input force. A wedge applies more force to the object (output force) than the user applies to the wedge (input force), so the mechanical advantage of a wedge is greater than 1. A longer, thinner wedge has a greater mechanical advantage than a shorter, wider wedge. With all wedges, the trade-off is that the output force is applied over a shorter distance, so force may need to be applied to the wedge repeatedly to push it through the object. Q: Which wedge in the Figure 1.3 do you think would do the same amount of work with less input force? A: The wedge on the left has a greater mechanical advantage, so it would do the same amount of work with less input force. 	a wedge with a greater mechanical advantage can do the same amount of work with less input force than a wedge with a lesser mechanical advantage	true
A wheel and axle is a simple machine that consists of two connected rings or cylinders, one inside the other. Both rings or cylinders turn in the same direction around a single center point. The inner ring or cylinder is called the axle, and the outer one is called the wheel. Besides the Ferris wheel, the doorknob in the Figure 1.1 is another example of a wheel and axle. In a wheel and axle, force may be applied either to the wheel or to the axle. This force is called the input force. A wheel and axle does not change the direction of the input force. However, the force put out by the machine, called the output force, is either greater than the input force or else applied over a greater distance. A: In a Ferris wheel, the force is applied to the axle by the Ferris wheels motor. In a doorknob, the force is applied to the wheel by a persons hand. 	the input force may be applied either to the wheel or the axle of a wheel and axle	true
A wheel and axle is a simple machine that consists of two connected rings or cylinders, one inside the other. Both rings or cylinders turn in the same direction around a single center point. The inner ring or cylinder is called the axle, and the outer one is called the wheel. Besides the Ferris wheel, the doorknob in the Figure 1.1 is another example of a wheel and axle. In a wheel and axle, force may be applied either to the wheel or to the axle. This force is called the input force. A wheel and axle does not change the direction of the input force. However, the force put out by the machine, called the output force, is either greater than the input force or else applied over a greater distance. A: In a Ferris wheel, the force is applied to the axle by the Ferris wheels motor. In a doorknob, the force is applied to the wheel by a persons hand. 	a wheel and axle changes the direction of the input force	false
The mechanical advantage of a machine is the factor by which the machine changes the input force. It equals the ratio of the output force to the input force. A wheel and axle may either increase or decrease the input force, depending on whether the input force is applied to the axle or the wheel. When the input force is applied to the axle, as it is with a Ferris wheel, the wheel turns with less force. Because the output force is less than the input force, the mechanical advantage is less than 1. However, the wheel turns over a greater distance, so it turns faster than the axle. The speed of the wheel is one reason that the Ferris wheel ride is so exciting. When the input force is applied to the wheel, as it is with a doorknob, the axle turns over a shorter distance but with greater force, so the mechanical advantage is greater than 1. This allows you to turn the doorknob with relatively little effort, while the axle of the doorknob applies enough force to slide the bar into or out of the doorframe. 	a wheel and axle may either increase or decrease the input force	true
Like the real Earth, the globe pictured above is a magnet. A magnet is an object that has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field. The magnetic globe is a modern device, but the idea that Earth is a magnet is far from new. It was first proposed in 1600 by a British physician named William Gilbert. He used a spherical magnet to represent Earth. With a compass, he demonstrated that it the spherical magnet causes a compass needle to behave the same way that Earth causes a compass needle to behave. This showed that a spherical magnet is a good model for Earth and therefore that Earth is a magnet. Q: Can you describe Earths magnetic poles and magnetic field? A: Earth has north and south magnetic poles. The North Pole is located at about 80 degrees north latitude. The magnetic field is an area around Earth that is affected by its magnetic field. The field is strongest at the poles, and lines of magnetic force move from the north to the south magnetic pole. 	earths magnetic north pole is located at 90 degrees north latitude	false
Although the idea that Earth is a magnet is centuries old, the discovery of why Earth is a magnet is a relatively new. In the early 1900s, scientists started using seismographic data to learn about Earths inner structure. A seismograph detects and measure earthquake waves. Evidence from earthquakes showed that Earth has a solid inner core and a liquid outer core (see the Figure 1.1). The outer core consists of molten metals, mainly iron and nickel. Scientists think that Earths magnetic field is generated by the movement of charged particles through these molten metals in the outer core. The particles move as Earth spins on its axis. 	earth has a liquid inner core and solid outer core	false
Work is directly related to both the force applied to an object and the distance the object moves. It can be represented by the equation: Work = Force  Distance This equation shows that the greater the force that is used to move an object or the farther the object is moved, the more work that is done. To see the effects of force and distance on work, compare the weight lifters in the Figure 1.2. The two weight lifters on the left are lifting the same amount of weight, but the one on the bottom is lifting the weight a greater distance. Therefore, this weight lifter is doing more work. The two weight lifters on the bottom right are both lifting the weight the same distance, but the weight lifter on the left is lifting a heavier weight, so she is doing more work. 	any force that is used to move an object does work	false
Work is defined differently in physics than in everyday language. In physics, work means the use of force to move an object. The teens who are playing basketball in the picture above are using force to move their bodies and the basketball, so they are doing work. The teen who is studying isnt moving anything, so she isnt doing work. Not all force that is used to move an object does work. For work to be done, the force must be applied in the same direction that the object moves. If a force is applied in a different direction than the object moves, no work is done. The Figure 1.1 illustrates this point. Q: If the box the man is carrying is very heavy, does he do any work as he walks across the room with it? A: Regardless of the weight of the box, the man does no work on it as he holds it while walking across the room. However, he does more work when he first lifts a heavier box to chest height. 	you do more work playing basketball than you do studying for a test	true
