Sand dunes form when the wind deposits sand.
Local winds are winds that blow over a limited area.
The Coriolis effect causes global winds to blow on a diagonal over the surface.
An air mass is a large body of air that has about the same conditions throughout.
Winds and air currents cause air masses to move.
A front forms at the boundary between two air masses. Types of fronts include cold, warm, occluded, and stationary fronts.
A hurricane is a large storm with high winds and heavy rains. They form over warm ocean water.
Weather balloons, satellites, and radar collect data in the atmosphere.
A weather map shows the weather for a certain area. It can show actual or predicted weather.
Climate is the average weather of a place over many years.
Life science is the study of life and living organisms.
An experiment is a controlled scientific test that often takes place in a lab.
Plants are multicellular eukaryotes in the Plant Kingdom.
Plants were the first living things to move from water to land. They had to cope with dryness and strong solar radiation.
Animals are multicellular eukaryotes in the Animal Kingdom.
Animals have specialized cells and often higher levels of organization. This allows them to do things that other eukaryotes cannot, such as move and digest food internally.
Echinoderms are ocean-dwelling invertebrates in Phylum Echinodermata.
Amphibians are vertebrates that live part of the time in fresh water and part of the time on land.
Reptiles are a class of ectothermic, four-legged vertebrates that produce amniotic eggs.
A primate is a mammal in the Primate Order of placental mammals.
Communication is any way that animals share information.
An ecosystem is a unit of nature. It consists of all the biotic and abiotic factors in an area and all the ways in which they interact.
Food chains and food webs are diagrams that model the flow of energy through ecosystems.
Ecological succession is the process in which the numbers and types of species in an ecosystem change over time.
Gregor Mendel was an Austrian monk who studied heredity in pea plants in the mid-1800s.
One of the greatest advances in modern genetics was sequencing the human genome. This was achieved in 2003 by the Human Genome Project.
Archaeans are prokaryotes in the Archaea Domain.
Physical science is the study of matter and energy. It includes chemistry, which focuses on matter, and physics, which focuses on energy.
A model is a representation of an object, system, or process.
Models help scientists investigate things that are too small, large, complex, or distant to study directly.
Engineers are professionals in technology.
