Weather refers to conditions of the atmosphere at a given time and place.
Humidity is the amount of water vapor in the air.
Clouds form when water vapor condenses in the air around specs of matter.
The Big Bang theory proposes that the universe formed in an enormous explosion about 13.7 billion years ago.
Recent evidence shows that there is a lot of matter in the universe that we cannot see. This matter is called dark matter. The rate of the expansion of the universe is increasing.
The color and luster describe the appearance of a mineral, and streak describes the color of the powdered mineral.
Body waves travel through the Earth and arrive at seismograms before surface waves. The surface seismic waves do the most damage because they only travel along the surface of the ground.
Seismologists use seismograms to determine how strong an earthquake is, how far away it is, and how long it lasts. Epicenters can be calculated using the difference in the arrival times of P-and S-waves from three seismograms.
Nearly all earthquake danger is from buildings falling, roadways collapsing, or from the fires and tsunami that come after the shaking stops.
Energy is the ability to change or move matter.
The science of classifying living things is called taxonomy.
The immune systems specific reaction to a pathogen is called an immune response.
All cells have a cell membrane, cytoplasm, DNA, and ribosomes.
The cytoskeleton is the skeleton of the cell.
Methods of asexual reproduction include binary fission, fragmentation, and budding.
Prokaryotes are single-celled organisms that lack a nucleus. They are placed in two domains: the Bacteria Domain and the Archaea Domain.
Some prokaryotes form biofilms, which are colonies of cells stuck to a surface.
The concentration of a solution is the amount of solute in a given amount of solution.
A solenoid is a coil of wire with electric current flowing through it.
Physical changes are changes in the physical properties of matter but not in the makeup of matter.
Chemical changes are changes in the makeup and chemical properties of matter.
A process in which matter changes between solid and gaseous states is sublimation.
